Albedo	File:Albedo-e  of diffusely reflected sun light in relation to various surface conditions of the Earth Albedo (), or "reflection coefficient", derived from Latin "albedo" "whiteness" (or reflected sunlight), in turn from "albus" "white", is the diffuse  reflectivity or reflecting power of a surface. It is defined as the ratio of reflected radiation from the surface to incident radiation upon it. Being a Dimensionless  fraction, it may also be expressed as a percentage, and is measured on a scale from zero for no reflecting power of a perfectly black surface, to 1 for perfect reflection of a white surface. Albedo depends on the frequency of the radiation. When quoted unqualified, it usually refers to some appropriate average across the spectrum of visible light. In general, the albedo depends on the directional distribution of incoming radiation. Exceptions are Lambertian surfaces, which scatter radiation in all directions according to a cosine function, so their albedo does not depend on the incident distribution. In practice, a bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) may be required to characterize the scattering properties of a surface accurately, although the albedo is a very useful first approximation. The albedo is an important concept in climatology and astronomy, as well as in calculating reflectivity of surfaces in LEED sustainable rating systems for buildings, computer graphics and computer vision. The average overall albedo of Earth, its "planetary albedo", is 30 to 35%, because of the covering by clouds, but varies widely locally across the surface, depending on the geological and environmental features. Environmental Encyclopedia, 3rd ed., Thompson Gale, 2003, ISBN 0-7876-5486-8 The term was introduced into optics by Johann Heinrich Lambert in his 1760 work "Photometria". ==Terrestrial albedo== {|   margin:10px" |+ Sample albedos |- ! Surface ! Typical <br  albedo |- | Fresh asphalt || 0.04 name="heat  |- | Worn asphalt || 0.12 name="heat island"  |- | Conifer forest <br  (Summer) || 0.08, name="Betts  0.09 to 0.15   |- | Deciduous trees || 0.15 to 0.18   |- | Bare soil || 0.17  |- | Green grass || 0.25   |- | Desert sand || 0.40  |- | New concrete || 0.55   |- | Ocean Ice|| 0.5–0.7   |- | Fresh snow || 0.80–0.90   |} Albedos of typical materials in visible light range from up to 0.9 for fresh snow, to about 0.04 for charcoal, one of the darkest substances. Deeply shadowed cavities can achieve an effective albedo approaching the zero of a black body. When seen from a distance, the ocean surface has a low albedo, as do most forests, while desert areas have some of the highest albedos among landforms. Most land areas are in an albedo range of 0.1 to 0.4.  The average albedo of the Earth is about 0.3. name="Goode"  This is far higher than for the ocean primarily because of the contribution of clouds. Human activities have changed the albedo (via forest clearance and farming, for example) of various areas around the globe. However, quantification of this effect on the global scale is difficult. The classic example of albedo effect is the  feedback. If a snow-covered area warms and the snow melts, the albedo decreases, more sunlight is absorbed, and the temperature tends to increase. The converse is true: if snow forms, a cooling cycle happens. The intensity of the albedo effect depends on the size of the change in albedo and the amount of insolation; for this reason it can be potentially very large in the tropics. File:Ceres 2003 2004 clear sky total sky  mean annual clear sky and total sky albedo The Earth's surface albedo is regularly estimated via Earth observation satellite sensors such as NASA's MODIS instruments on board the Terra  and Aqua  satellites. As the total amount of reflected radiation cannot be directly measured by satellite, a mathematical model of the BRDF is used to translate a sample set of satellite reflectance measurements into estimates of  reflectance and  reflectance. (e. g., . name="NASA"  ) The Earth's average surface temperature due to its albedo and the greenhouse effect is currently about 15 °C. If the Earth was frozen entirely (and hence be more reflective) the average temperature of the planet would drop below −40 °C   If only the continental land masses became covered by glaciers, the mean temperature of the planet would drop to about 0 °C   . In contrast, if all the ice on earth were to melt - a so-called aquaplanet - the average temperature on the plant would rise to just under 27 °C. name="Smith Robin"  ===White-sky and black-sky albedo=== It has been shown that for many applications involving terrestrial albedo, the albedo at a particular solar Celestial coordinate system|zenith angle  {\theta_i}  can reasonably be approximated by the proportionate sum of two terms: the  reflectance at that solar zenith angle,  {\bar   , and the  reflectance,  \bar{ \bar \alpha}  the proportion concerned being defined as the proportion of diffuse illumination  {D}  . Albedo  {\alpha}  can then be given as: :  {\alpha}= (1-D) \bar  + D \bar{ \bar \alpha}.   reflectance is sometimes referred to as black-sky albedo and  reflectance as white sky albedo. These terms are important because they allow the albedo to be calculated for any given illumination conditions from a knowledge of the intrinsic properties of the surface.   ==Astronomical albedo== The albedos of planets, natural  and asteroids can be used to infer much about their properties. The study of albedos, their dependence on wavelength, lighting angle ("phase angle"), and variation in time comprises a major part of the astronomical field of photometry  For small and far objects that cannot be resolved by telescopes, much of what we know comes from the study of their albedos. For example, the absolute albedo can indicate the surface ice content of outer solar system objects, the variation of albedo with phase angle gives information about regolith properties, while unusually high radar albedo is indicative of high metallic content in asteroids. Enceladus  a moon of Saturn, has one of the highest known albedos of any body in the Solar system, with 99% of EM radiation reflected. Another notable high-albedo body is Eris (dwarf planet)|Eris, with an albedo of 0.96 .  Many small objects in the outer solar system  and asteroid belt have low albedos down to about 0.05.  A typical comet nucleus has an albedo of 0.04.  Such a dark surface is thought to be indicative of a primitive and heavily space  weathered surface containing some organic compounds. The overall albedo of the Moon is around 0.12, but it is strongly directional and  displaying also a strong opposition effect. name="medkeff"  While such reflectance properties are different from those of any terrestrial terrains, they are typical of the regolith surfaces of airless solar system bodies. Two common albedos that are used in astronomy are the (V-band) geometric albedo (measuring brightness when illumination comes from directly behind the observer) and the Bond albedo (measuring total proportion of  energy reflected). Their values can differ significantly, which is a common source of confusion. In detailed studies, the directional reflectance properties of astronomical bodies are often expressed in terms of the five Hapke parameters which  describe the variation of albedo with phase angle  angle, including a  of the opposition effect of regolith surfaces. The correlation between astronomical (geometric) albedo, Absolute  magnitude for planets (H)|absolute magnitude and diameter is:   A =\left (  \right ) ^2  , where  A  is the astronomical albedo,  D  is the diameter in kilometres, and "H" is the absolute magnitude. ==Examples of terrestrial albedo effects==  Although the  effect is best known in colder, whiter regions on Earth, the maximum albedo is actually found in the tropics where year-round illumination is greater. The maximum is additionally in the northern hemisphere, varying between 3 and 12 degrees north.  The minima are found in the subtropical regions of the north and south hemispheres, beyond which albedo increases without respect to illumination.  ===Small-scale effects=== Albedo works on a smaller scale, too. In sunlight, dark clothes absorb more heat and light-coloured clothes reflect it better, thus allowing some control over body temperature by exploiting the albedo effect of the colour of external clothing.  ===Trees=== Since forests are generally attributed a low albedo, (as the majority of the ultraviolet and visible spectrum is absorbed through  it has been erroneously assumed that removing forests would lead to cooling on the grounds of increased albedo. Through the  of water, trees discharge excess heat from the forest canopy. This water vapour rises resulting in cloud cover which also has a high albedo, thereby further increasing the net global cooling effect attributable to forests. In seasonally snow-covered zones, winter albedos of treeless areas are 10% to 50% higher than nearby forested areas because snow does not cover the trees as readily. Deciduous trees have an albedo value of about 0.15 to 0.18 while coniferous trees have a value of about 0.09 to 0.15.   Studies by the Hadley Centre have investigated the relative (generally warming) effect of albedo change and (cooling) effect of carbon sequestration on planting forests. They found that new forests in tropical and midlatitude areas tended to cool; new forests in high latitudes (e.g. Siberia) were neutral or perhaps warming. name="Betts"  ===Snow=== Snow albedos can be as high as 0.9; this, however, is for the ideal example: fresh deep snow over a featureless landscape. Over Antarctica they average a little more than 0.8. If a marginally snow-covered area warms, snow tends to melt, lowering the albedo, and hence leading to more snowmelt (the ice-albedo positive feedback). Cryoconite, powdery windblown dust containing soot, sometimes reduces albedo on glaciers and ice sheets. name = "Nat.   "Changing Greenland - Melt Zone"] page 3, of 4, article by Mark Jenkins in "National Geographic  Geographic" June 2010, accessed July 8, 2010 ===Water=== Water reflects light very differently from typical terrestrial materials. The reflectivity of a water surface is calculated using the Fresnel equations (see graph). File:water  of smooth water at 20 °C (refractive index=1.333) At the scale of the wavelength of light even wavy water is always smooth so the light is reflected in a locally specular  manner (not Diffuse  The glint of light off water is a commonplace effect of this. At small angle of  of incident light, waviness results in reduced reflectivity because of the steepness of the  curve and a locally increased average incident angle. name="Fresnel"  Although the reflectivity of water is very low at low and medium angles of incident light, it increases tremendously at high angles of incident light such as occur on the illuminated side of the Earth near the terminator  (early morning, late afternoon and near the poles). However, as mentioned above, waviness causes an appreciable reduction. Since the light specularly reflected from water does not usually reach the viewer, water is usually considered to have a very low albedo in spite of its high reflectivity at high angles of incident light. Note that white caps on waves look white (and have high albedo) because the water is foamed up, so there are many superimposed bubble surfaces which reflect, adding up their  Fresh ‘black’ ice exhibits Fresnel reflection. ===Clouds=== Cloud albedo has substantial influence over atmospheric temperatures. Different types of clouds exhibit different reflectivity, theoretically ranging in albedo from a minimum of near 0 to a maximum approaching 0.8. "On any given day, about half of Earth is covered by clouds, which reflect more sunlight than land and water. Clouds keep Earth cool by reflecting sunlight, but they can also serve as blankets to trap warm
Alabama	Alabama () is a state located in the Southern United  region of the United States. It is bordered by Tennessee to the north, Georgia (U.S. state)|Georgia to the east, Florida and the Gulf of Mexico to the south, and Mississippi to the west. Alabama is the List of U.S. states and territories by area|30th-most extensive and the List of U.S. states and territories by  populous of the 50 United States. Alabama ranks second in the area of its inland waterways. From the American Civil War until World War II, Alabama, like many Southern states, suffered economic hardship, in part because of continued dependence on agriculture. Despite the growth of major industries and urban centers, White American|white rural interests dominated the state legislature until the 1960s, while urban interests and African Americans were   Following World War II, Alabama experienced growth as the economy of the state transitioned from agriculture to diversified interests in heavy manufacturing, mineral extraction, education, and technology. In addition, the establishment or expansion of multiple military installations, primarily those of the U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force, added to state jobs. Alabama is unofficially nicknamed the "Northern  State", after the List of U.S. state birds|state bird. Alabama is also known as the "Dixie|Heart of Dixie." The List of U.S. state trees|state tree is the Longleaf Pine, the List of U.S. state flowers|state flower is the Camellia. The capital of Alabama is Montgomery,  The largest city by population is Birmingham,  The largest city by total land area is Huntsville,  The oldest city is Mobile,  founded by French colonists. ==History== <!---please insert new material in main article before summarizing here. Also, look for opportunities to delete material here if you are inserting new material. This is long enough.   The Alabama people, a Muskogean  tribe whose members lived just below the confluence of the Coosa River|Coosa and Tallapoosa Rivers on the upper reaches of the Alabama River,  served as the  source of the names of the river and state. In the Alabama language, the word for an Alabama person is "Albaamo" (or variously "Albaama" or "Albàamo" in different dialects; the plural form "Alabama persons" is "Albaamaha"). The word "Alabama" is believed to have originated from the Choctaw language  and was later adopted by the Alabama tribe as their name.  The spelling of the word varies significantly between sources.  The first usage appears in three accounts of the Hernando de Soto expedition of 1540 with Garcilasso de la Vega using "Alibamo", while the Knight of Elvas and Rodrigo Ranjel wrote "Alibamu" and "Limamu", respectively.  As early as 1702, the tribe was known to the French as "Alibamon" with French maps identifying the river as "Rivière des Alibamons".  Other spellings of the appellation have included "Alibamu", "Alabamo", "Albama", "Alebamon", "Alibama", "Alibamou", "Alabamu", and "Allibamou".     The use of state names derived from Indigenous languages of the  American languages is common; an estimated 27 states have names of Native American origin. Although the origin of "Alabama" could be discerned, sources disagree on its meaning. An 1842 article in the "Jacksonville Republican" originated the idea that the meaning was "Here We Rest."  This notion was popularized in the 1850s through the writings of Alexander Beaufort Meek.  Experts in the Muskogean languages have been unable to find any evidence to support such a translation.   Scholars believe the word comes from the Choctaw "alba" (meaning "plants" or "weeds") and "amo" (meaning "to cut", "to trim", or "to gather").    The meaning may have been "clearers of the thicket"  or "herb gatherers"   which may refer to clearing of land for cultivation  or to collecting medicinal plants.  ===Indigenous peoples, early history=== File:Cheaha Lake in the  Cheaha, Alabama's highest point Indigenous peoples of varying cultures lived in the area for thousands of years before European colonization. Trade with the Northeast via the Ohio River began during the Burial Mound Period (1000 BC–AD 700) and continued until European colonization of the  contact.  The agrarian Mississippian culture covered most of the state from AD 1000 to 1600, with one of its major centers being at the Moundville Archaeological Site in Moundville, Alabama. Analysis of Artifact  recovered from archaeological excavations at Moundville were the basis of scholars' formulating the  of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex (SECC). Contrary to popular belief, the SECC appears to have no direct links to Mesoamerican culture, but developed independently. The Ceremonial Complex represents a major component of the religion of the Mississippian peoples; it is one of the primary means by which their religion is understood. Among the historical tribes of Native American people living in the area of present-day Alabama at the time of European contact were  Cherokee, and the  Alabama  ("Alibamu"), Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek people|Creek, Koasati, and Mobilian Jargon|Mobile. ===European settlement=== The French founded the first European settlement in the region at Old Mobile Site|Old Mobile, in 1702.  The area was French from 1702 to 1763; part of British West Florida from 1763 to 1780. Thomas Bassett was the first British settler in the state. He settled near what is now Tombigbee River in Washington County,  County. Alabama became part of Spanish West Florida from 1780 to 1810; part of the independent Republic of West Florida for a short time (90 days); annexed by the U.S. and added to the Territory of Orleans (1810); and, finally, added to the Mississippi Territory in 1812. Throughout these later developments, however, the Spanish had kept a nominal (although largely ignored) governmental presence in the region, based out of Mobile,  When Andrew Jackson's forces occupied Mobile in 1814 —while preparing for the Battle of New Orleans —he demonstrated the United States' "de facto" authority over the region, effectively ending Spanish governance (though not its claim), while gaining an unencumbered passage to the gulf.  The area making up today's northern and central Alabama, known as the Yazoo lands, had been claimed by the Province of Georgia after 1767. Following the American  War, it remained a part of the Georgia (U.S. state)|state of Georgia —although heavily disputed. Conflicting claims to the area were held, first by several Native American tribes (most notably the Chickamauga  and Yazoo tribe|Yazoo), by other states (e.g. South Carolina); and by the Federal government of the United States|US federal government; United Kingdom of Great Britain and  and Spain. In 1802, the region was joined to the Mississippi Territory. Individual statehood was delayed, however, by the territory's lack of a coastline. ===Statehood, Civil War, and   Alabama state capital ruins at "Capital Park" in Tuscaloosa,  Alabama was admitted to the Union in 1819 as the 22nd state. Part of the frontier in the 1820s and 1830s, its constitution provided for universal suffrage for white men. Settlers rapidly arrived to take advantage of the fertile soil. Southeastern planters and traders from the Upper South brought slavery|slaves with them as the cotton plantations expanded. The economy of the central "Black Belt (region of Alabama)|Black Belt" (named for its dark, productive soil) was built around large cotton plantations whose owners' wealth grew largely from slave labor.  The area also drew many poor, disfranchised people who became subsistence farmers. The 1860 census records show that enslaved Africans comprised 45% of the state's total population of 964,201. There were only 2,690 Freedman|free persons of color living in Alabama at the time. From 1826 to 1846, Tuscaloosa,  served as the capital of Alabama. On January 30, 1846, the Alabama legislature announced that it had voted to remove the capital city from Tuscaloosa to Montgomery,  The first legislative session in the new capital met in December 1847. In time, a Capitol building was erected under the direction of a Philadelphia, Pennsylvania architect. The original structure burnt down in 1849 but was rebuilt in 1851 following the original plans.  Montgomery: History – Early Days in Montgomery, Lafayette's Visit a Local Highlight <!-- Bot generated title  ] On January 11, 1861, Alabama declared its Secession in the United  from the Union (American Civil War)|Union and joined the Confederate States of America. While few battles were fought in the state, Alabama contributed about 120,000 soldiers to the American Civil War. Alabama's slaves were freed by the 13th Amendment in 1865.  During Reconstruction era of the United  the new state legislators created a public school system for the first time, as well as establishing some welfare institutions to help its people. Alabama was officially restored to the Union in 1868. After the Civil War, the state was still chiefly agricultural, with an economy tied to cotton. Planters resisted working with free labor during Reconstruction era of the United  and sought to re-establish controls over freedmen. In the early years the Ku Klux Klan had numerous independent chapters in Alabama that attacked freedmen and other Republicans. After it was suppressed, insurgent whites organized paramilitary groups, such as the Red Shirts (Southern United States)|Red Shirts and White League, that acted more openly to suppress black voting. Regaining power by the late 1870s, in the last decade of the 19th century, white Democrats passed electoral laws  after Reconstruction  most blacks and many poor whites. J. Morgan Kousser."The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of the One-Party South", New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974 Having regained power in the state legislature, Democrats passed Jim Crow laws, including racial segregation in public facilities, to restore white supremacy in the society. In 1875, the state passed the Blaine Amendment, to prohibit public money from being used to finance Catholic schools.  Image:FSA school in  in Alabama (Farm Security  1935) The new 1901 Constitution of Alabama effectively disfranchised African Americans and many poor whites through voting restrictions, including literacy requirements. While the planter class had persuaded poor whites to support these legislative efforts, the new restrictions resulted in  after Reconstruction  poor whites as well, due mostly to imposition of a cumulative poll tax. In 1900, 14 Black Belt (U.S. region)|Black Belt counties had more than 79,000 voters on the rolls. By June 1, 1903, the number of registered voters had dropped to 1,081. In 1900, Alabama had more than 181,000 African Americans eligible to vote. By 1903, only 2,980 had qualified to register, although at least 74,000 black voters were literate.  By 1941, a total of more whites than blacks had been disfranchised: 600,000 whites to 520,000 blacks.  Glenn Feldman. "The  Myth: Poor Whites and Suffrage Restriction in Alabama". Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2004, p. 136. Nearly all African Americans lost the ability to vote. The  was ended by African Americans' leading the Civil Rights Movement and gaining Federal legislation in the mid-1960s to protect their voting and civil rights. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 also protected the suffrage of poor whites. The  Alabama legislature consistently underfunded schools and services for the disfranchised African Americans in the segregated state, but did not relieve them of paying taxes.  Continued racial  agricultural depression, and the failure of the cotton crops due to boll weevil infestation led tens of thousands of African Americans to seek opportunities in northern cities. They left Alabama in the early 20th century as part of the Great Migration (African  Migration to industrial jobs and better futures in northern industrial cities. The population growth rate in Alaba
Achilles	File:Greek Achilles killing  killing the Amazon Penthesilea. Attic Black figure pottery. Exekias, painter, 540–530 BC. In Greek mythology, Achilles (, "Akhilleus", ) was a Greeks|Greek hero of the Trojan War, the central character and the greatest warrior of Homer's "Iliad". Plato named Achilles the most handsome of the heroes assembled against Troy. Plato, "Symposium   180a] Later legends (beginning with a poem by Statius in the 1st century AD) state that Achilles was invulnerable in all of his body except for his heel. As he died because of a small wound on his heel, the term "Achilles' heel" has come to mean one's point of weakness. == Etymology == Achilles' name can be analyzed as a combination of ("akhos") "grief" and ("Laos") "a people, tribe, nation, etc." In other words, Achilles is an embodiment of the grief of the people, grief being a theme raised numerous times in the "Iliad" (frequently by Achilles). Achilles' role as the hero of grief forms an ironic juxtaposition with the conventional view of Achilles as the hero of "kleos" (glory, usually glory in war). "Laos" has been construed by Gregory Nagy, following Leonard Palmer, to mean "a corps of soldiers", a muster  With this derivation, the name would have a double meaning in the poem: When the hero is functioning rightly, his men bring grief to the enemy, but when wrongly, his men get the grief of war. The poem is in part about the misdirection of anger on the part of leadership. The name Achilleus was a common and attested name among the Greeks soon after the 7th century BC.  Epigraphical database] gives 476 matches for Ἀχιλ-.The earliest ones:  Corinth 7th c.  Delphi 530 BC], Attica and Elis 5th c. BC. It was also turned into the female form  ("Achilleía") attested in Attica in the 4th century BC (Inscriptiones Graecae|IG II² 1617) and, in the form "Achillia", on a Female  in Halicarnassus as the name of a female gladiator fighting an "Amazon". Roman gladiatorial games often referenced classical mythology, and this seems to reference Achilles' fight with Penthesilea but gives it an extra twist of Achilles' being "played" by a woman. == Birth ==  is an oil painting of the Goddess Thetis dipping her son Achilles into the River Styx, which runs through Hades. In the background, the ferryman Charon can be seen taking the dead across the river in his boat. The scene was painted by Peter Paul Reubens around 1625. Achilles was the son of the nymph Thetis and Peleus, the king of the Myrmidons. Zeus and Poseidon had been rivals for the hand of Thetis until Prometheus, the fore-thinker, warned Zeus of a prophecy that Thetis would bear a son greater than his father. For this reason, the two gods withdrew their pursuit, and had her wed Peleus. Aeschylus, "Prometheus Bound" 755–768; Pindar, "Nemean" 5.34–37, "Isthmian" 8.26–47; "Poeticon astronomicon" (ii.15) As with most mythology, there is a tale which offers an alternative version of these events: in "Argonautica" (iv.760) Zeus' sister and wife Hera alludes to Thetis' chaste resistance to the advances of Zeus, that Thetis was so loyal to Hera's marriage bond that she coolly rejected him. Thetis, although a daughter of the sea-god Nereus, was also brought up by Hera, further explaining her resistance to the advances of Zeus. <!--the following psychological interpretation has no counterpart in the myths:"Zeus was furious and decreed that she would never marry an immortal. So Hera recommended that she marry Peleus, as he was as near to a mortal as she was ever going to  Image:The Education of Achilles, by James  Education of Achilles" (ca. 1772), by James Barry  Barry According to the "Achilleid", written by Statius in the 1st century AD, and to no surviving previous sources, when Achilles was born Thetis tried to make him immortal, by dipping him in the river Styx. However, he was left vulnerable at the part of the body by which she held him, his heel (see Achilles heel, Achilles' tendon). It is not clear if this version of events was known earlier. In another version of this story, Thetis anointed the boy in ambrosia and put him on top of a fire, to burn away the mortal parts of his body. She was interrupted by Peleus and abandoned both father and son in a rage. Apollonius of Rhodes, "Argonautica" 4.869–879. However, none of the sources before Statius makes any reference to this general  To the contrary, in the "Iliad" Homer mentions Achilles being wounded: in Book 21 the Paeonian hero Asteropaeus, son of Pelagon, challenged Achilles by the river Scamander. He cast two spears at once, one grazed Achilles' elbow, "drawing a spurt of blood". Also, in the fragmentary poems of the Epic Cycle in which we can find description of the hero's death, "Cypria" (unknown author), "Aithiopis" by Arctinus of Miletus, "Little Iliad" by Lesche of Mytilene, "Iliou persis" by Arctinus of Miletus, there is no trace of any reference to his general  or his famous weakness (heel); in the later vase paintings presenting Achilles' death, the arrow (or in many cases, arrows) hit his body. Peleus entrusted Achilles to Chiron the Centaur, on Mt. Pelion, to be reared. Hesiod, "Catalogue of Women", fr. 204.87–89 MW; "Iliad" 11.830-32 == Achilles in the Trojan War == Image:The Rage of Achilles by Giovanni Battista  Rage of Achilles", by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo The first two lines of the "Iliad" read: : : :Sing, Goddess, of the rage of Peleus' son Achilles, :the accursed rage that brought great suffering to the Achaeans  Achilles' consuming rage is at times wavering, but at other times he cannot be cooled. The humanization of Achilles by the events of the war is an important theme of the narrative. According to the "Iliad", Achilles arrived at Troy with 50 ships, each carrying 50 Myrmidons (Book 2). He appointed five leaders (each leader commanding 500 Myrmidons): Menesthius, Eudorus, Peisander, Phoenix and Alcimedon (Book 16). === Telephus === When the Greeks left for the Trojan War, they accidentally stopped in Mysia, ruled by King Telephus. In the resulting battle, Achilles gave Telephus a wound that would not heal; Telephus consulted an oracle, who stated that "he that wounded shall heal". Guided by the oracle, he arrived at Argos, where Achilles healed him in order that he might become their guide for the voyage to Troy. According to other reports in Euripides' lost play about Telephus, he went to Aulis (ancient Greece)|Aulis pretending to be a beggar and asked Achilles to heal his wound. Achilles refused, claiming to have no medical knowledge. Alternatively, Telephus held Orestes  for ransom, the ransom being Achilles' aid in healing the wound. Odysseus reasoned that the spear had inflicted the wound; therefore, the spear must be able to heal it. Pieces of the spear were scraped off onto the wound and Telephus was healed. === Troilus === According to the "Cypria" (the part of the Epic Cycle that tells the events of the Trojan War before Achilles' Wrath), when the Achaeans  desired to return home, they were restrained by Achilles, who afterwards attacked the cattle of Aeneas, sacked neighboring cities and killed Troilus.  According to Dares Phrygius' "Account of the Destruction of Troy", the Latin summary through which the story of Achilles was transmitted to medieval Europe, Troilus was a young Trojan prince, the youngest of King Priam's (or sometimes Apollo) and Hecuba's five legitimate sons. Despite his youth, he was one of the main Trojan war leaders. Prophecies linked Troilus' fate to that of Troy and so he was ambushed in an attempt to capture him. Yet Achilles, struck by the beauty of both Troilus and his sister Polyxena, and overcome with lust, directed his sexual attentions on the youth – who refusing to yield found instead himself decapitated upon an altar-omphalos of Apollo. Later versions of the story suggested Troilus was accidentally killed by Achilles in an over-ardent lovers' embrace. In this version of the myth, Achilles' death therefore came in retribution for this sacrilege. James Davidson,  "Zeus Be Nice Now"] in "London Review of Books;" 19 July 2007, accessed October 23, 2007 Ancient writers treated Troilus as the epitome of a dead child mourned by his parents. Had Troilus lived to adulthood, the First Vatican Mythographer claimed Troy would have been invincible. === Achilles in the "Iliad" ===  sacrificing to Zeus, from the Ambrosian Iliad, a 5th-century illuminated manuscript Homer's "Iliad" is the most famous narrative of Achilles' deeds in the Trojan War. Achilles' wrath is the central theme of the book. The Homeric epic only covers a few weeks of the war, and does not narrate Achilles' death. It begins with Achilles' withdrawal from battle after he is dishonored by Agamemnon, the commander of the Achaeans  forces. Agamemnon had taken a woman named Chryseis as his slave. Her father Chryses, a priest of Apollo, begged Agamemnon to return her to him. Agamemnon refused and Apollo sent a plague amongst the Greeks. The prophet Calchas correctly determined the source of the troubles but would not speak unless Achilles vowed to protect him. Achilles did so and Calchas declared Chryseis must be returned to her father. Agamemnon consented, but then commanded that Achilles' battle prize Briseis be brought to replace Chryseis. Angry at the dishonor (and as he says later, because he loved Briseis) "Iliad" 9.334–343. and at the urging of his mother Thetis, Achilles refused to fight or lead his troops alongside the other Greek forces. At this same time, burning with rage over Agamemnon's theft, Achilles prayed to Thetis to convince Zeus to help the Trojans gain ground in the war, so that he may regain his honor. As the battle turned against the Greeks, thanks to the influence of Zeus, Nestor  declared that the Trojans were winning because Agamemnon had angered Achilles, and urged the king to appease the warrior. Agamemnon agreed and sent Odysseus and two other chieftains, Ajax  and Phoenix (son of  to Achilles with the offer of the return of Briseis and other gifts. Achilles rejected all Agamemnon offered him, and simply urged the Greeks to sail home as he was planning to do. The Trojans, led by Hector, subsequently pushed the Greek army back toward the beaches and assaulted the Greek ships. With the Greek forces on the verge of absolute destruction, Patroclus led the Myrmidons into battle wearing Achilles' armor, though Achilles remained at his camp. Patroclus succeeded in pushing the Trojans back from the beaches, but was killed by Hector before he could lead a proper assault on the city of Troy. Image:Triumph of Achilles in Corfu  Achilles dragging Hector's lifeless body in front of the Gates of Troy (from a panoramic fresco on the upper level of the main hall of the Achilleion  After receiving the news of the death of Patroclus from Antilochus, the son of Nestor, Achilles grieved over his beloved companion's death and held many funeral games in his honor. His mother Thetis came to comfort the distraught Achilles. She persuaded Hephaestus to make a new armor for him, in place of the armor that Patroclus had been wearing which was taken by Hector. The new armor included the Shield of Achilles, described in great detail by the poet. Enraged over the death of Patroclus, Achilles ended his refusal to fight and took the field killing many men in his rage but always seeking out Hector. Achilles even engaged in battle with the river god Scamander who became angry that Achilles was choking his waters with all the men he killed. The god tried to drown Achilles but was stopped by Hera and Hephaestus. Zeus himself took note of Achilles' rage and sent the gods to restrain him so that he would not go on to sack Troy itself, seeming to show that the unhindered rage of Achilles could defy fate itself as Troy was not meant to be destroyed yet. Finally, Achilles found his prey. Achilles chased Hector around the wall of Troy three times before Athena, in the form of Hecto
Abraham Lincoln	Abraham Lincoln (February 12, 1809 – April 15, 1865) was the List of Presidents of the United States|16th President of the United States, serving from March 1861 until Assassination of Abraham Lincoln|his assassination in April 1865. He successfully led his country through its greatest  military and moral crisis – the American Civil War – preserving the Union while ending slavery, and promoting economic and financial modernization. Reared in a poor family on the western frontier, Lincoln was mostly self-educated. He became a country lawyer, a Whig Party (United States)|Whig Party leader, Illinois House of  state legislator in the 1830s, and a one-term member of the United States House of  in the 1840s. After a series of debates in 1858 that gave national visibility to his opposition to the expansion of slavery, Lincoln lost a Senate race to his arch-rival Stephen A. Douglas. Lincoln, a moderate from a swing state, secured the History of the Republican Party (United  Party nomination. With almost no support in the South he swept the North and was United States presidential election, 1860|elected president in 1860. His election was the signal for seven Southern United  slave states to declare their Secession in the United  from the Union and form the Confederate States of America. The departure of the Southerners gave Lincoln's party firm control of Congress, but no formula for compromise or reconciliation was found. And the war came. When the North  rallied behind the national flag after the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter on April 12, 1861, President Lincoln concentrated on the military and political dimensions of the war effort. His goal was now to reunify the nation. He vigorously exercised unprecedented war powers, including the arrest and detention without trial of thousands of suspected secessionists. He prevented British recognition of the Confederacy by skillfully handling the Trent Affair|"Trent" affair late in 1861. His efforts toward the  of slavery include issuing his Emancipation Proclamation in 1863, encouraging the border states to outlaw slavery, and helping push through Congress the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which finally ended all slavery in December 1865. Lincoln closely supervised the war effort, especially the selection of top generals, including commanding general Ulysses S. Grant. He brought leaders of various factions of his party into his cabinet and pressured them to cooperate. Under his leadership, the Union (American Civil War)|Union set up a naval blockade that shut down the South's normal trade, took control of the Border states (American Civil War)|border slave states at the start of the war, gained control of communications with gunboats on the southern river systems, and tried repeatedly to capture the Confederate capital at Richmond, Virginia. Each time a general failed, Lincoln substituted another until finally Grant succeeded in 1865. An exceptionally astute politician deeply involved with power issues in each state, he reached out to War Democrats and managed his own re-election in the United States presidential election, 1864|1864 presidential election. As the leader of the moderate faction of the Republican party, Lincoln found his policies and personality were "blasted from all sides": Radical Republicans demanded harsher treatment of the South, War Democrats desired more compromise, Copperheads  despised him, and irreconcilable secessionists plotted his death. Tagg, p. xiii. Politically, Lincoln fought back with patronage, by pitting his opponents against each other, and by appealing to the American people with his powers of oratory. Randall (1947), pp. 65–87. His Gettysburg Address of 1863 became the most quoted speech in American history.  Bulla (2010), p. 222. It was an iconic statement of America's dedication to the principles of nationalism, Republicanism in the United  equal rights, liberty, and democracy. At the close of the war, Lincoln held a moderate view of Reconstruction Era of the United  seeking to reunite the nation speedily through a policy of generous reconciliation in the face of lingering and bitter divisiveness. But six days after the surrender of Confederate commanding general Robert E. Lee, Lincoln was Assassination of Abraham  by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth. His death was the first assassination of a U.S. president and sent the nation into Funeral and burial of Abraham  Lincoln has been consistently Historical rankings of Presidents of the United States#Scholar survey results|ranked by scholars and the public as one of the three greatest U.S. presidents. name="Ranking Our   "Ranking Our Presidents"]. James Lindgren. November 16, 2000. International World History Project.   "Americans Say Reagan Is the Greatest President"]. Gallup Inc. February 28, 2011. ==Family and childhood== ===Early life=== Abraham Lincoln was born February 12, 1809, the second child of Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Lincoln (née Hanks), in a one-room log cabin on the Sinking Spring Farm in Hardin County,  County, Kentucky, Donald (1996), pp. 20–22. (now LaRue County, Kentucky|LaRue County). Lincoln's paternal grandfather and namesake, Abraham Lincoln  had moved his family from Virginia to Jefferson County,  County, Kentucky,  Pessen, pp. 24–25.  where he was ambushed and killed in an Indian raid in 1786, with his children, including Lincoln's father Thomas, looking on.  White, pp. 12–13. Thomas was left to make his own way on the frontier. Donald (1996), p. 21. Lincoln's mother, Nancy, was the daughter of Lucy Hanks, and was born in what is now Mineral County, West  County, West Virginia, then part of Virginia. Lucy moved with Nancy to Kentucky. Nancy Hanks married Thomas, who became a respected citizen. He bought and sold several farms, including Knob Creek Farm. The family attended a Separate Baptists church, which had high moral standards and opposed alcohol, dancing, and slavery. Donald (1996), pp. 22–24. Thomas enjoyed considerable status in  he sat on juries, appraised estates, served on country slave patrols, and guarded prisoners. By the time his son Abraham was born, Thomas owned two farms, several town lots, livestock, and horses. He was among the richest men in the county.  Lamb, p. 189. However, in 1816, Thomas lost all of his land in court cases because of faulty title  titles.  File:Young Lincoln By Charles  young Lincoln in sculpture at Senn Park, Chicago|alt=A statue of young Lincoln sitting on a stump, holding a book open on his lap The family moved north across the Ohio River to free (i.e., non-slave) territory and made a new start in Perry County, Indiana|Perry County, Indiana. Lincoln later noted that this move was "partly on account of slavery" but mainly due to land title difficulties.  Sandburg (1926), p. 20. In Indiana, when Lincoln was nine, his mother Nancy died of milk sickness in 1818.  After the death of Lincoln's mother, his older sister, Sarah Lincoln Grigsby|Sarah, took charge of caring for him until their father remarried in 1819; Sarah later died in her 20s while giving birth to a stillborn son. Donald (1996), p. 20. Thomas Lincoln's new wife was the widow Sarah Bush Lincoln|Sarah Bush Johnston, the mother of three of her own children. Lincoln became very close to his stepmother, and referred to her as "Mother". Donald (1996), pp. 26–27. As a pre-teen, he did not like the hard labor associated with frontier life. Some in his family, and in the neighborhood, for a time considered him to be lazy. White, pp. 25, 31, 47. Donald (1996), p. 33. As he grew into his teens, he willingly took responsibility for all chores expected of him as one of the boys in the household and became an adept axeman in his work building rail fences. He attained a reputation for brawn and audacity after a very competitive wrestling match to which he was challenged by the renowned leader of a group of ruffians, "the Clary's Grove boys". Donald (1996), p. 41. Lincoln also agreed with the customary obligation of a son to give his father all earnings from work done outside the home until age 21.  Donald (1996), pp. 30–33. In later years, Lincoln occasionally loaned his father money. Donald (1996), pp. 28, 152. Lincoln became increasingly distant from his father, in part because of his father's lack of education. While young Lincoln's formal elementary education consisted approximately of a year's worth of classes from several itinerant teachers, he was mostly self-educated and was an avid reader. Donald (1996), pp. 38–43; Prokopowicz, pp. 18–19. In 1830, fearing a milk sickness outbreak along the Ohio River, the Lincoln family moved west, where they settled on public land in Macon County, Illinois|Macon County, Illinois, another free, non-slave state. Donald (1996), p. 36. In 1831, Thomas relocated the family to a Lincoln Log Cabin State Historic Site|new homestead in Coles County, Illinois|Coles County, Illinois. It was then that, as an ambitious 22-year-old, Lincoln decided to seek a better life and struck out on his own. Canoeing down the Sangamon River, Lincoln ended up in the village of New Salem, Menard County, Illinois|New Salem in Sangamon County,  County. Thomas (2008), pp. 23–53; Carwardine (2003), pp. 3–5. In the spring of 1831, hired by New Salem businessman Denton Offutt and accompanied by friends, he took goods by flatboat from New Salem to New Orleans via the Sangamon, Illinois, and Mississippi rivers. After arriving in New Orleans—and witnessing slavery firsthand—he walked back home. Sandburg (1926), pp. 22–23. ===Marriage and children=== Lincoln's first romantic interest was Ann Rutledge, whom he met when he first moved to New Salem; by 1835, they were in a relationship but not formally engaged. She died on August 25, most likely of typhoid fever. Donald (1996), pp. 55–58. In the early 1830s, he met Mary Owens from Kentucky when she was visiting her sister. Late in 1836, Lincoln agreed to a match with Mary if she returned to New Salem. Mary did return in November 1836, and Lincoln courted her for a time; however, they both had second thoughts about their relationship. On August 16, 1837, Lincoln wrote Mary a letter suggesting he would not blame her if she ended the relationship. She never replied and the courtship was over. Donald (1996), pp. 67–69; Thomas (2008), pp. 56–57, 69–70. In 1840, Lincoln became engaged to Mary Todd Lincoln|Mary Todd, who was from a wealthy slave-holding family in Lexington,  Kentucky. Lamb, p. 43. They met in Springfield,  Illinois, in December 1839  Sandburg (1926), pp. 46–48. and were engaged the following December. Donald (1996), p. 86. A wedding set for January 1, 1841, was canceled when the two broke off their engagement at Lincoln's initiative.  Donald (1996), p. 87. They later met again at a party and married on November 4, 1842, in the Springfield mansion of Mary's married sister. Sandburg (1926), pp. 50–51. While preparing for the nuptials and feeling anxiety again, Lincoln, when asked where he was going, replied, "To hell, I suppose." Donald (1996), p. 93. In 1844, the couple bought Lincoln Home National Historic Site|a house in Springfield near Lincoln's law office. Mary Todd Lincoln kept house, often with the help of a relative or hired servant girl. Baker, p. 142. Robert Todd Lincoln was born in 1843 and Edward Baker Lincoln (Eddie) in 1846. Lincoln "was remarkably fond of children", White, p. 126. and the Lincolns were not considered to be strict with their children. Baker, p. 120. Edward died on February 1, 1850, in Springfield, likely of tuberculosis. William Wallace  Lincoln was born on December 21, 1850, and died on February 20, 1862. The Lincolns' fourth son, Tad Lincoln|Thomas "Tad" Lincoln, was born on April 4, 1853, and died of heart failure at the age of 18 on July 16, 1871. White, pp. 179–181, 476. Robert was the only child to live to adulthood and have children. His last descenda
Aristotle	Aristotle (,  (384 BC – 322 BC) That these undisputed dates (the first half of the Olympiad year 384/3, and in 322 shortly before the death of Demosthenes) are correct was shown already by August Boeckh ("Kleine Schriften" VI 195); for further discussion, see Felix Jacoby on "FGrHist" 244 F 38. Ingemar Düring, "Aristotle in the Ancient Biographical Tradition", Göteborg, 1957, p. 253. was a Greeks|Greek  and polymath, a student of Plato and teacher of Alexander the Great. His writings cover many subjects, including Physics  metaphysics, Poetics  theater, music, logic, rhetoric, linguistics, politics, government, ethics, biology, and zoology. Together with Plato and Socrates (Plato's teacher), Aristotle is one of the most important founding figures in Western philosophy. Aristotle's writings were the first to create a comprehensive system of Western philosophy, encompassing morality, aesthetics, logic, science, politics, and metaphysics. Aristotle's views on the Aristotelian  sciences profoundly shaped medieval scholarship, and their influence extended well into the Renaissance, although they were ultimately replaced by Classical  physics. In the zoological sciences, some of his observations were confirmed to be accurate only in the 19th century. His works contain the earliest known formal study of logic, which was incorporated in the late 19th century into modern formal logic. In metaphysics,  had a profound influence on Judeo-Islamic philosophies (800 -  and theological thinking in the Islamic and Jewish traditions in the Middle Ages, and it continues to influence Christian theology, especially the  tradition of the Catholic Church. His ethics, though always influential, gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics. All aspects of Aristotle's philosophy continue to be the object of active academic study today. Though Aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues (Cicero described his literary style as "a river of gold"), it is thought that the majority of his writings are now lost and only about one-third of the original works have survived. Jonathan Barnes, "Life and Work" in "The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle" (1995), p. 9. ==Life== Aristotle, whose name means "the best purpose," was born in Stageira, Chalcidice, in 384 BC, about east of modern-day Thessaloniki. His father Nicomachus (father of  was the personal physician to Amyntas III of Macedon|King Amyntas of Macedon. Aristotle was trained and educated as a member of the aristocracy. At about the age of eighteen, he went to Athens to continue his education at Platonic  Academy. Aristotle remained at the academy for nearly twenty years before quitting Athens in 348/47 BC. The traditional story about his departure reports that he was disappointed with the direction the academy took after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus upon his death, although it is possible that he feared  sentiments and left before Plato had died. name="Lord  Carnes Lord, Introduction to "The Politics", by Aristotle (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984). He then traveled with Xenocrates to the court of his friend Hermias of Atarneus in Asia Minor. While in Asia, Aristotle traveled with Theophrastus to the island of Lesbos Island|Lesbos, where together they researched the botany and zoology of the island. Aristotle married Hermias's adoptive daughter (or niece) Pythias. She bore him a daughter, whom they named Pythias. Soon after Hermias' death, Aristotle was invited by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his son Alexander the Great in 343 BC.  Bertrand Russell, "A History of Western Philosophy", Simon & Schuster, 1972 File:Arabic  Islamic portrayal of Aristotle Aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of Macedon. During that time he gave lessons not only to Alexander, but also to two other future kings: Ptolemy I Soter|Ptolemy and Cassander. Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest, and his attitude towards Persia was unabashedly ethnocentric. In one famous example, he counsels Alexander to be 'a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians, to look after the former as after friends and relatives, and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants'. Peter Green, "Alexander of Macedon", 1991 University of California Press, Ltd. Oxford, England. Library of Congress  Data, p.58–59 By 335 BC he had returned to Athens, establishing his own school there known as the Lyceum  Aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years. While in Athens, his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stageira, who bore him a son whom he named after his father, Nicomachus (son of  According to the Suda, he also had an eromenos,  of Abydus. William George  of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology", vol. 3,  p. 88] It is during this period in Athens from 335 to 323 BC when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works.  Aristotle wrote many dialogues, only fragments of which survived. The works that have survived are in treatise form and were not, for the most part, intended for widespread publication, as they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students. His most important treatises include "Physics  "Metaphysics  "Nicomachean Ethics", "Politics  "De Anima (On the Soul)" and "Poetics  Aristotle not only studied almost every subject possible at the time, but made significant contributions to most of them. In physical science, Aristotle studied anatomy, astronomy, embryology, geography, geology, meteorology, physics and zoology. In philosophy, he wrote on aesthetics, ethics, government, metaphysics, politics, economics, psychology, rhetoric and theology. He also studied education, foreign customs, literature and poetry. His combined works constitute a virtual encyclopedia of Greek knowledge. It has been suggested that Aristotle was probably the last person to know everything there was to be known in his own time. Near the end of Alexander's life, Alexander began to suspect plots against himself, and threatened Aristotle in letters. Aristotle had made no secret of his contempt for Alexander's pretense of divinity, and the king had executed Aristotle's grandnephew Callisthenes as a traitor. A widespread tradition in antiquity suspected Aristotle of playing a role in Alexander's death, but there is little evidence for this. Peter Green, "Alexander of Macedon", 1991 University of California Press, Ltd. Oxford, England. Library of Congress  Data, p.379,459 Upon Alexander's death,  sentiment in Athens once again flared. Eurymedon the hierophant denounced Aristotle for not holding the gods in honor. Aristotle fled the city to his mother's family estate in Chalcis, explaining, "I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy," "Vita Marciana" 41, cf. Claudius  "Varia historica" 3.36, Ingemar Düring, "Aristotle in the Ancient Biographical Tradition", Göteborg, 1957, T44a-e. a reference to Athens's prior Trial of Socrates|trial and execution of Socrates. He died in Euboea of natural causes within the year (in 322 BC). Aristotle named chief executor his student Antipater and left a Will (law)|will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife. Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt by Hildegard Temporini, Wolfgang Haase  Aristotle's Will] ==Thought== ===Logic=== File:Aristotle in Nuremberg  portrayed in the 1493 "Nuremberg Chronicle" as a  scholar With the "Prior Analytics", Aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic, and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th century advances in mathematical logic. Kant stated in the "Critique of Pure Reason" that Aristotle's theory of logic completely accounted for the core of deductive inference.  Aristotle "says that 'on the subject of reasoning' he 'had nothing else on an earlier date to speak of'". However, Plato reports that syntax was devised before him, by Prodicus of Ceos, who was concerned by the correct use of words. Logic seems to have emerged from dialectics; the earlier philosophers made frequent use of concepts like "reductio ad absurdum" in their discussions, but never truly understood the logical implications. Even Plato had difficulties with logic; although he had a reasonable conception of a deductive system, he could never actually construct one and relied instead on his dialectic.   Bocheński, 1951. Plato believed that deduction would simply follow from premises, hence he focused on maintaining solid premises so that the Logical  would logically follow. Consequently, Plato realized that a method for obtaining conclusions would be most beneficial. He never succeeded in devising such a method, but his best attempt was published in his book "Sophist  where he introduced his division method. ====Analytics and the "Organon"==== What we today call "Aristotelian logic", Aristotle himself would have labeled "analytics". The term "logic" he reserved to mean "dialectics". Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, since it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers. The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into six books in about the early 1st century AD: #"Categories" #"On  #"Prior Analytics" #"Posterior Analytics" #"Topics" #"On Sophistical Refutations" The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings. It goes from the basics, the analysis of simple terms in the "Categories," the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in "On  to the study of more complex forms, namely, syllogisms (in the "Analytics") and dialectics (in the "Topics" and "Sophistical Refutations"). The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory "stricto sensu": the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning. There is one volume of Aristotle's concerning logic not found in the "Organon", namely the fourth book of "Metaphysics."   ===Aristotle's scientific method=== File:Sanzio 01 Plato  (left) and Aristotle (right), a detail of "The School of Athens" <!-- this should link to an article about the famous artwork  , a fresco by Raphael. Aristotle gestures to the earth, representing his belief in knowledge through empirical observation and experience, while holding a copy of his "Nicomachean Ethics" in his hand, whilst Plato gestures to the heavens, representing his belief in The Forms. File:Francesco Hayez  by Francesco Hayez (1791–1882) Like his teacher Plato, Aristotle's philosophy aims at the Universality  Aristotle, however, found the universal in particular things, which he called the essence of things, while Plato finds that the universal exists apart from particular things, and is related to them as their prototype or exemplar. For Aristotle, therefore, philosophic method implies the ascent from the study of particular phenomena to the knowledge of essences, while for Plato philosophic method means the descent from a knowledge of universal Theory of Forms|Forms (or ideas) to a contemplation of particular imitations of these. For Aristotle, "form" still refers to the unconditional basis of phenomena but is "instantiated" in a particular substance (see  and  and particulars", below). In a certain sense, Aristotle's method is both Inductive  and Deductive  while Plato's is essentially deductive from "A priori and a posteriori (philosophy)|a priori" principles. In Aristotle's terminology, "natural philosophy" is a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world, and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics, biology and other natural sciences. In modern times, the scope of "philosophy" has become limited to more generic or abstract inquiries, such as ethics and metaphysics, in which logic plays a major role. Today's philosophy tends to exclude empirical study of the natural world by means of the scientific m
An American in Paris	File:George Gershwin An American in  theme from George Gershwin's orchestral composition "An American in Paris" "An American in Paris " is a  tone poem by the American composer George Gershwin, written in 1928. Inspired by the time Gershwin had spent in Paris, it evokes the sights and energy of the France|French capital in the 1920s. It is one of Gershwin's best-known compositions. Gershwin composed the piece on commission from the New York Philharmonic. He also did the orchestration (he did not orchestrate his musicals). Gershwin scored "An American in Paris" for the standard instruments of the symphony orchestra plus celesta, saxophones, and automobile horns. Gershwin brought back some Parisian taxi horns for the New York City|New York premiere of the composition, which took place on December 13, 1928 in Carnegie Hall, with Walter Damrosch conducting the New York Symphony. Gershwin collaborated on the original program notes with the critic and composer Deems Taylor, noting that: "My purpose here is to portray the impression of an American visitor in Paris as he strolls about the city and listens to various street noises and absorbs the French atmosphere." When the tone poem moves into the blues, "our American friend ... has succumbed to a spasm of homesickness." But, "nostalgia is not a fatal disease." The American visitor "once again is an alert spectator of Parisian life" and "the street noises and French atmosphere are triumphant." ==Background== Maurice Ravel met Gershwin in New York during Ravel's tour of the United States. In that meeting, Gershwin asked Ravel to be his teacher, to which Ravel responded that it was better to be a first-rate Gershwin than it was to be a second-rate Ravel. Instead, Ravel recommended that Gershwin see Nadia Boulanger in Paris. Ravel's high praise of Gershwin in an introductory letter to Boulanger caused Gershwin to seriously consider taking time to study abroad in Paris. Gershwin arrived in Paris in March 1928. Paris at this time hosted many expatriate writers: Ezra Pound, W. B. Yeats, Ernest Hemingway; and artist Pablo Picasso. Gershwin met with Boulanger and at her request he played ten minutes of his music. Boulanger replied that she had nothing to teach him. This did not set Gershwin back, as his real intent abroad was to complete a new work based on Paris and perhaps a second rhapsody for piano and orchestra.  Gershwin based "An American in Paris" on a melodic fragment called "Very Parisienne", written in 1926 on his first visit to Paris as a gift to his hosts, Robert and Mabel Schirmer. He described the piece as a "rhapsodic ballet" because it was written freely and is more modern than his previous works. Gershwin explained in "Musical America", "My purpose here is to portray the impressions of an American visitor in Paris as he strolls about the city, listens to the various street noises, and absorbs the French atmosphere." The piece is structured into five sections, which culminate in a loose Ternary form|ABA format. Gershwin's first A episode introduces the two main "walking" themes in the "Allegretto grazioso" and develops a third theme in the "Subito con brio". The style of this A section is written in the typical French style of composers Claude Debussy and Les Six. This A section featured duple meter, singsong rhythms, and diatonic melodies with the sounds of oboe, English horn, and taxi horns. The B section's "Andante ma con ritmo deciso" introduces the American Blues and spasms of homesickness. The "Allegro" that follows continues to express homesickness in a faster twelve-bar blues. In the B section, Gershwin uses common time, syncopated rhythms, and bluesy melodies with the sounds of trumpet, saxophone, and snare drum. "Moderato con grazia" is the last A section that returns to the themes set in A. After recapitulating the "walking" themes, Gershwin overlays the slow blues theme from section B in the final   "An American in Paris" is scored for 3 flutes (3rd doubling on piccolo), 2 oboes, English horn, 2 clarinets in B flat, bass clarinet in B flat, 2 bassoons, 4 Horn  in F, 3 trumpets in B flat, 3 trombones, tuba, timpani, snare drum, bass drum, triangle, wood block, cymbals, low and high Tom-tom drum|tom-toms, xylophone, glockenspiel, celesta, 4 taxi horns resembling the pitches A, B, C and D, alto  saxophone, tenor  saxophone/alto saxophone, baritone  saxophone/alto saxophone, and String  The revised edition by F.  calls for three saxophones, alto, tenor and baritone. In this arrangement the soprano and alto doublings have been rewritten to avoid changing instruments. ==Response== Gershwin did not particularly like Walter Damrosch's interpretation at the world premiere of "An American in Paris". He stated that Damrosch's sluggish, dragging tempo caused him to walk out of the hall during a matinee performance of this work. The audience, according to Edward Cushing, responded with "a demonstration of enthusiasm impressively genuine in contrast to the conventional applause which new music, good and bad, ordinarily arouses." Critics believed that "An American in Paris" was better crafted than his lukewarm Concerto in F  in F. Some did not think it belonged in a program with classical composers César Franck, Richard Wagner, or Guillaume Lekeu on its premiere. Gershwin responded to the critics, "It's not a Beethoven Symphony, you know… It's a humorous piece, nothing solemn about it. It's not intended to draw tears. If it pleases symphony audiences as a light, jolly piece, a series of impressions musically expressed, it succeeds." ==Recordings== File:American in  Recording "An American in Paris" has been frequently recorded over the years. The very first recording was made for RCA Victor in 1929 with Nathaniel Shilkret conducting the Victor Symphony Orchestra, drawn from members of the Philadelphia Orchestra. Gershwin was on hand to "supervise" the recording; however, Shilkret was reported to be in charge and eventually asked the composer to leave the recording studio. Then, a little later, Shilkret discovered there was no one to play the brief celesta solo during the slow section, so he hastily asked Gershwin if he might play the solo; Gershwin said he could and so he briefly participated in the actual recording. The radio broadcast of the September 8, 1937 Hollywood Bowl George Gershwin Memorial Concert, in which "An American in Paris," also conducted by Shilkret, was second on the program, was recorded and was released in 1998 in a two-CD set. Arthur Fiedler and the Boston Pops Orchestra recorded the work for RCA Victor, including one of the first stereo recordings of the music. In 1945, Arturo Toscanini and the NBC Symphony Orchestra recorded the music in Carnegie Hall, one of the few commercial recordings Toscanini made of music by an American composer. The Seattle Symphony also recorded a version in the 1980s of Gershwin's original score, before he made numerous edits resulting in the score as we hear it today. ==Use in film== In 1951, MGM released the musical "An American in Paris (film)|An American in Paris", featuring Gene Kelly and Leslie Caron. Winning the 1951 Best Picture Oscar and numerous other awards, the film was directed by Vincente Minnelli, featured many tunes of Gershwin, and concluded with an extensive, elaborate dance sequence built around the "An American in Paris" symphonic poem (arranged for the film by Johnny Green), costing $500,000. A part of the symphonic composition is also featured in "As Good as It Gets", released in 1997. ==References== Rimler, Walter. "George Gershwin : an intimate portrait". Urbana : University of Illinois Press, 2009. 29-33. Print. Pollack, Howard. "George Gershwin : his life and work". Berkeley : University of California Press, 2006. 431-42. Print. ==External links== *  1944 recording] by The New York Philharmonic conducted by Artur Rodzinsky.  by George Gershwin  poems  Hall of Fame Award recipients Category:1928 compositions Category:Music about Paris ca:Un americà a París de:Ein Amerikaner in Paris es:Un americano en París (Gershwin) fr:Un Américain à Paris (Gershwin) ko:파리의 미국인  בפריז hu:Egy amerikai Párizsban (Gershwin) nl:An American in Paris (Gershwin)  pl:Amerykanin w Paryżu (Gershwin)  Pariisissa sv:An American in Paris (symfonisk dikt)  
Academy Award for Best Art Direction	The Academy Awards are the oldest awards ceremony for achievements in film|motion pictures. The Academy Award for Best Art Direction recognizes achievement in art  direction on a film. The films below are listed with their production year, so the Oscar 2000 for best art direction went to a film from 1999. In the lists below, the winner of the award for each year is shown first, followed by the other nominees.  {|   center" |- !width="150"| Category !width="150"| Name !width="150"| Superlative !width="350"| Notes |- |Most Awards |Cedric Gibbons |11 awards |Awards resulted from 39 nominations.   |- |Most Nominations |Cedric Gibbons |39 nominations |Nominations resulted in 11 awards. |- |Most Nominations <br  (without ever winning) |Roland Anderson |15 nominations |Anderson died in 1989. |} ==Best Interior Decoration== ===1920s=== {|  |-  ! width="8%" | Year ! width="19%" | Interior Decorator ! width="19%" | Film |- |- | rowspan=5  | 1928 in film|1927/28 <br  |-  | rowspan=2 | William Cameron Menzies | "The Dove (1927 film)|The Dove " |- |-  | "Tempest (1928 film)|Tempest " |- | Harry Oliver | "Seventh Heaven (1927 film)|Seventh Heaven" |- | "Rochus Gliese" | "Sunrise  |- | rowspan=7  | 1929 in film|1928/29 <br  |-  | Cedric Gibbons | "The Bridge of San Luis Rey (1929 film)|The Bridge of San Luis Rey " |- | Mitchell Leisen | "Dynamite  |- | rowspan=2 | William Cameron Menzies | "Alibi (1929 film)|Alibi" |- | "The Awakening (1928 film)|The Awakening" |- | Hans Dreier | "The Patriot (1928 film)|The Patriot" |- | Harry Oliver | "Street Angel (1928 film)|Street Angel" |} ===1930s=== {|  |-  ! width="8%" | Year ! width="19%" | Interior Decorator(s) ! width="19%" | Film |- |- | rowspan=6  | 1930 in film|1929/30 <br  |-  | Herman Rosse | "King of Jazz " |- | William Cameron Menzies | "Bulldog Drummond (1929 film)|Bulldog Drummond" |- | Hans Dreier | "The Love Parade" |- | Jack Okey | "Sally (film)|Sally" |- | Hans Dreier | "The Vagabond King (1930 film)|The Vagabond King" |- | rowspan=6  | 1931 in film|1930/31 <br  |-  | Max Ree | "Cimarron (1931 film)|Cimarron " |- | Stephen Goosson  Ralph Hammeras | "Just Imagine" |- | Hans Dreier | "Morocco (1930 film)|Morocco" |- | Anton Grot | "Svengali (1931  |- | Richard Day (art  Day | "Whoopee!  |- | rowspan=4  | 1932 in film|1931/32 <br  |-  | Gordon Wiles | "Transatlantic  " |- | Lazare Meerson | "À nous la liberté" |- | Richard Day (art  Day | "Arrowsmith  |- | rowspan=4  | 1933 in film|1932/33 <br  |-  | William S. Darling | "Cavalcade (1933  " |- | Hans Dreier  Roland Anderson | "A Farewell to Arms (1932 film)|A Farewell to Arms" |- | Cedric Gibbons | "When Ladies Meet (1933 film)|When Ladies Meet" |- | rowspan=4  | 1934 in film|1934 <br  |-  | Cedric Gibbons  Fredric Hope | "The Merry Widow (1934 film)|The Merry Widow " |- | Van Nest Polglase  Carroll Clark | "The Gay Divorcee" |- | Richard Day (art  Day | "The Affairs of Cellini" |- | rowspan=4  | 1935 in film|1935 <br  |-  | Richard Day (art  Day | "The Dark Angel (1935 film)|The Dark Angel " |- | Hans Dreier  Roland Anderson | "The Lives of a Bengal Lancer" |- | Carroll Clark  Van Nest Polglase | "Top Hat" |- | rowspan=8  | 1936 in film|1936 <br  |-  | Richard Day (art  Day | "Dodsworth  " |- | Anton Grot | "Anthony Adverse" |- | Cedric Gibbons  Eddie Imazu  Edwin B. Willis | "The Great Ziegfeld" |- | William S. Darling | "Lloyd's of London (film)|Lloyd's of London" |- | Albert S. D'Agostino  Jack Otterson | "The Magnificent Brute" |- | Cedric Gibbons  Frederic Hope  Edwin B. Willis | "Romeo and Juliet (1936 film)|Romeo and Juliet" |- | Perry Ferguson | "Winterset  |- | rowspan=13  | 1937 in film|1937 <br  |-  | Stephen Goosson | "Lost Horizon (1937 film)|Lost Horizon " |- | Cedric Gibbons  William Horning | "Conquest (1937  |- | Carroll Clark | "A Damsel in Distress (film)|A Damsel in Distress" |- | Richard Day (art  Day | "Dead End (1937 film)|Dead End" |- | Ward Ihnen | "Every Day's a Holiday (1937 film)|Every Day's a Holiday" |- | Anton Grot | "The Life of Emile Zola" |- | John Victor MacKay | "Manhattan Merry-Go-Round   |- | Lyle Wheeler | "The Prisoner of Zenda (1937 film)|The Prisoner of Zenda" |- | Hans Dreier  Roland Anderson | "Souls at Sea" |- | Alexander Toluboff | "Vogues of 1938" |- | William S. Darling  David S. Hall | "Wee Willie Winkie (film)|Wee Willie Winkie" |- | Jack Otterson | "You're a Sweetheart" |- | rowspan=12  | 1938 in film|1938 <br  |-  | Carl J. Weyl | "The Adventures of Robin Hood (film)|The Adventures of Robin Hood " |- | Lyle Wheeler | "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1938 film)|The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" |- | Bernard Herzbrun  Boris Leven | "Alexander's Ragtime Band  Ragtime Band" |- | Alexander Toluboff | "Algiers  |- | Van Nest Polglase | "Carefree  |- | Richard Day (art  Day | "The Goldwyn Follies" |- | Stephen Goosson  Lionel Banks | "Holiday (1938 film)|Holiday" |- | Hans Dreier  John B. Goodman | "If I Were King" |- | Jack Otterson | "Mad About Music" |- | Cedric Gibbons | "Marie Antoinette (1938 film)|Marie Antoinette" |- | Charles D. Hall | "Merrily We Live" |- | rowspan=13  | 1939 in film|1939 <br  |-  | Lyle Wheeler | "Gone with the Wind (film)|Gone with the Wind " |- | Hans Dreier  Robert Odell | "Beau Geste (1939 film)|Beau Geste" |- | Charles D. Hall | "Captain Fury" |- | Jack Otterson  Martin Obzina | "First Love (1939 film)|First Love" |- | Van Nest Polglase  Alfred Herman | "Love Affair (1939 film)|Love Affair" |- | John Victor Mackay | "Man of Conquest" |- | Lionel Banks | "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" |- | Anton Grot | "The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex" |- | William S. Darling  George Dudley (art  Dudley | "The Rains Came" |- | Alexander Toluboff | "Stagecoach (1939  |- | Cedric Gibbons  William A. Horning | "The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)|The Wizard of Oz" |- | James Basevi | "Wuthering Heights (1939  Heights" |} ===1940s=== {|  |-  ! width="8%" | Year ! width="19%" | Interior Decorator(s) ! width="19%" | Film |- |- | rowspan=19  | 1940 in film|1940 <br  From 1940, the award was split into  and color. | colspan=2   |  |-  | Richard Day (art  Day  Paul Groesse | "Pride and Prejudice (1940 film)|Pride and Prejudice " |- | Hans Dreier  Robert Usher | "Arise, My Love" |- | Lionel Banks  Robert Peterson (art  Peterson | "Arizona (1940 film)|Arizona" |- | John Otterson | "The Boys from Syracuse (film)|The Boys from Syracuse" |- | John Victor Mackay | "Dark Command" |- | Alexander Golitzen | "Foreign Correspondent (film)|Foreign Correspondent" |- | Richard Day (art  Day  Joseph C. Wright | "Lillian Russell (film)|Lillian Russell" |- | Van Nest Polglase  Mark-Lee Kirk | "My Favorite Wife" |- | John DuCasse Schulze | "My Son, My Son (film)|My Son, My Son" |- | Lewis J. Rachmil | "Our Town (1940 film)|Our Town" |- | Lyle Wheeler | "Rebecca (1940 film)|Rebecca" |- | Anton Grot | "The Sea Hawk (1940 film)|The Sea Hawk" |- | James Basevi | "The Westerner (film)|The Westerner" |- | colspan=2   | Color |-  | Vincent Korda | "The Thief of Bagdad (1940 film)|The Thief of Bagdad " |- | Cedric Gibbons  John S. Detlie | "Bitter Sweet (1940 film)|Bitter Sweet" |- | Richard Day (art  Day  Joseph C. Wright | "Down Argentine Way" |- | Hans Dreier  Roland Anderson | "Northwest Mounted Police (film)|North West Mounted Police" |- | rowspan=16  | 1941 in film|1941 <br  | colspan=2   |  |-  | Cedric Gibbons  Nathan H. Juran  Thomas Little | "How Green Was My Valley (film)|How Green Was My Valley " |- | Perry Ferguson  Van Nest Polglase  Al Fields  Darrell Silvera | "Citizen Kane" |- | Martin Obzina  Jack Otterson  Russell A. Gausman | "The Flame of New Orleans" |- | Hans Dreier  Robert Usher  Samuel M. Comer | "Hold Back the Dawn" |- | Lionel Banks  George Montgomery (set  Montgomery | "Ladies in Retirement" |- | Stephen Goosson  Howard Bristol | "The Little Foxes (film)|The Little Foxes" |- | John Hughes (art director)|John Hughes  Fred M. MacLean | "Sergeant York" |- | John DuCasse Schultze  Edward G. Boyle | "Son of Monte Cristo" |- | Alexander Golitzen  Richard Irvine | "Sundown (1941 film)|Sundown" |- | Vincent Korda  Julia Heron | "That Hamilton Woman" |- | Cedric Gibbons  Randall Duell  Edwin B. Willis | "When Ladies Meet (1941 film)|When Ladies Meet" |- | colspan=2   | Color |-  | Cedric Gibbons  Urie McCleary  Edwin B. Willis | "Blossoms in the Dust " |- | Richard Day (art  Day  Joseph C. Wright  Thomas Little | "Blood and Sand (1941 film)|Blood and Sand" |- | Raoul Pene Du Bois  Stephen A. Seymour | "Louisiana Purchase  Purchase" |- | rowspan=17  | 1942 in film|1942 <br  | colspan=2   |  |-  | Richard Day (art  Day  Joseph Wright (art  Wright  Thomas Little | "This Above All (film)|This Above All " |- | Max Parker  Mark-Lee Kirk  Casey Roberts | "George Washington Slept Here" |- | Albert S. D'Agostino  Al Fields  Darrell Silvera | "The Magnificent Ambersons (film)|The Magnificent Ambersons" |- | Perry Ferguson  Howard Bristol | "The Pride of the Yankees" |- | Cedric Gibbons  Randall Duell  Edwin B. Willis  Jack Moore | "Random Harvest (film)|Random Harvest" |- | Boris Leven | "The Shanghai Gesture" |- | Ralph Berger  Emile Kuri | "Silver Queen" |- | John B. Goodman  Jack Otterson  Russell A. Gausman  Edward Ray Robinson | "The Spoilers (1942 film)|The Spoilers" |- | Hans Dreier  Roland Anderson  Samuel M. Comer | "Take a Letter, Darling" |- | Lionel Banks  Rudolph Sternad  Fay Babcock | "The Talk of the Town (1942 film)|The Talk of the Town" |- | colspan=2   | Color |-  | Richard Day (art  Day  Joseph Wright (art  Wright  Thomas Little | "My Gal Sal " |- | Alexander Golitzen  Jack Otterson  Russell A. Gausman  Ira S. Webb | "Arabian Nights (1942 film)|Arabian Nights" |- | Ted Smith (art director)|Ted Smith  Casey Roberts | "Captains of the Clouds" |- | Vincent Korda  Julia Heron | "Jungle Book (1942 film)|Jungle Book" |- | Hans Dreier  Roland Anderson  George Sawley | "Reap the Wild Wind" |- | rowspan=13  | 1943 in film|1943 <br  | colspan=2   |  |-  | James Basevi  William S. Darling  Thomas Little | "The Song of Bernadette (film)|The Song of Bernadette " |- | Hans Dreier  Ernst Fegte  Bertram Granger | "Five Graves to Cairo" |- | Albert S. D'Agostino  Carroll Clark  Darrell Silvera  Harley Miller | "Flight for Freedom" |- | Cedric Gibbons  Paul Groesse  Edwin B. Willis  Hugh Hunt | "Madame Curie (film)|Madame Curie" |- | Carl Weyl  George J. Hopkins | "Mission to Moscow" |- | Perry Ferguson  Howard Bristol | "The North Star (1943 film)|The North Star" |- | colspan=2   | Color |-  | Alexander Golitzen  John B. Goodman  Russell A. Gausman  Ira S. Webb | "Phantom of the Opera (1943 film)|Phantom of the Opera " |- | Hans Dreier  Haldane Douglas  Bertram Granger | "For Whom the Bell Tolls (film)|For Whom the Bell Tolls" |- | James Basevi  Joseph C. Wright  Thomas Little | "The Gang's All Here (1943 film)|The Gang's All Here" |- | John Hughes (art director)|John Hughes  George J. Hopkins | "This Is the Army" |- | Cedric Gibbons  Daniel Cathcart  Edwin B. Willis  Jacques Mersereau | "Thousands Cheer" |- | rowspan=17  | 1944 in film|1944 <br  | colspan=2   |  |-  | Cedric Gibbons  William Ferrari  Paul Huldschinsky  Edwin B. Willis | "Gaslight (1944 film)|Gaslight " |- | Lionel Banks  Walter Holscher  Joseph Kish | "Address Unknown (1944 film)|Address Unknown" |- | John Hughes (art director)|John Hughes  Fred M. MacLean | "The Adventures of Mark Twain (1944 film)|The Adventures of Mark Twain" |- | Perry Ferguson  Julia Heron | "Casanova Brown" |- | Lyle Wheeler  Leland Fuller  Thomas Little | "Laura (1944 film)|Laura" |- | Hans Dreier  Robert Usher  Samuel M. Comer | "No Time for Love (1943 film)|No Time for Love" |- | Mark-Lee Kirk  Victor A. Gangelin | "Since You Went Away" |- | Albert S. D'Agostino  Carroll Clark  Darrell Silvera  Claude Carpenter | "Step Lively (1944 film)|Step Lively" |- | colspan=2   | Color |-  | Wiard Ihnen  Thomas Little | "Wilson (film)|Wilson " |- | John B. Goodman  Alexander Golitzen  Russell A. Gausman  Ira S. We
Academy Award	An Academy Award is an award bestowed by the American Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) to recognize excellence of professionals in the film industry, including directors, actors and writers. The Oscar statuette is officially named the Academy Award of Merit and is one of nine types of Academy Awards. The formal ceremony at which the Awards of Merit are presented is one of the most prominent award ceremonies in the world, and is televised live in more than 100 countries annually. It is also the oldest award ceremony in the media; its equivalents, the Grammy Awards (for music), Emmy Awards (for television), and Tony Awards (for theatre) are modeled after the Academy. The AMPAS was originally conceived by  studio boss Louis B. Mayer as a professional honorary organization to help improve the film industry’s image and help mediate labor disputes. The Oscar itself was later initiated by the Academy as an award "of merit for distinctive achievement" in the industry. The 1st Academy Awards|first Academy Awards ceremony was held on May 16, 1929, at the Roosevelt Hotel  Roosevelt in Hollywood to honor the outstanding film achievements of the 1927/1928 film season. The 84th Academy Awards, honoring 2011 in film|films in 2011, was held at the Hollywood and Highland Center  and Highland Center on February 26, 2012. == History ==  Cooper and Joan Fontaine holding their Oscars at the Academy Awards, 1942 The first awards were presented on May 16, 1929, at a private brunch at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel with an audience of about 270 people. The post Academy Awards party was held at the Mayfair Hotel.  The cost of guest tickets for that night's ceremony was $5. Fifteen statuettes were awarded, honoring artists, directors and other personalities of the filmmaking industry of the time for their works during the 1927–1928 period. Winners had been announced three months earlier; however that was changed in the second ceremony of the Academy Awards in 1930. Since then and during the first decade, the results were given to newspapers for publication at 11 pm on the night of the awards.  This method was used until the "Los Angeles Times" announced the winners before the ceremony began; as a result, the Academy has used a sealed envelope to reveal the name of the winners since 1941.  For the first six ceremonies, the eligibility period spanned two calendar years. For example, the 2nd Academy Awards presented on April 3, 1930, recognized films that were released between August 1, 1928 and July 31, 1929. Starting with the 7th Academy Awards, held in 1935, the period of eligibility became the full previous calendar year from January 1 to December 31. The first Best Actor awarded was Emil Jannings, for his performances in "The Last Command (film)|The Last Command" and "The Way of All Flesh". He had to return to Europe before the ceremony, so the Academy agreed to give him the prize earlier; this made him the first Academy Award winner in history. The honored professionals were awarded for all the work done in a certain category for the qualifying period; for example, Jannings received the award for two movies in which he starred during that period. Since the fourth ceremony, the system changed, and professionals were honored for a specific performance in a single film. , a total of 2,809 Oscars have been given for 1,853 awards. A total of 302 actors have won Oscars in competitive acting categories or have been awarded Honorary or Juvenile Awards. The 1939 film "Beau Geste (1939 film)|Beau Geste" is the only movie that features as many as four Academy Award winners for Best Actor in a Leading Role (Gary Cooper, Ray Milland, Susan Hayward, Broderick Crawford) prior to any of the actors receiving the Best Actor Award. At the 29th ceremony, held on March 27, 1957, the Best Foreign Language Film category was introduced. Until then,  films were honored with the Special Achievement Award. == Oscar statuette == === Design === Although there are seven other types of annual awards presented by the Academy (the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award, the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award, the Gordon E. Sawyer Award, the Scientific and Engineering Award, the Technical Achievement Award, the John A. Bonner Medal of Commendation, and the Student Academy Award) plus two awards that are not presented annually (the Special Achievement Award in the form of an Oscar statuette and the Honorary Award that may or may not be in the form of an Oscar statuette), the best known one is the "Academy Award of Merit" more popularly known as the Oscar statuette. Made of gold-plated britannia  on a black metal base, it is 13.5 in (34 cm) tall, weighs 8.5 lb (3.85 kg) and depicts a knight rendered in Art Deco style holding a  sword standing on a reel of film with five spokes. The five spokes each represent the original branches of the Academy: Actors, Writers, Directors, Producers, and Technicians. In 1928, MGM's art director Cedric Gibbons, one of the original Academy members, supervised the design of the award trophy by printing the design on a scroll. In need of a model for his statuette, Gibbons was introduced by his future wife Dolores del Río to Mexican film director and actor Emilio  "El Indio" Fernández. Reluctant at first, Fernández was finally convinced to pose nude to create what today is known as the "Oscar". Then, sculptor George Stanley  Stanley (who also did the Muse Fountain at the Hollywood Bowl) sculpted Gibbons's design in clay and Sachin Smith cast the statuette in 92.5 percent tin and 7.5 percent copper and then gold-plated it. The only addition to the Oscar since it was created is a minor streamlining of the base. The original Oscar mold was cast in 1928 at the C.W. Shumway & Sons Foundry in Batavia, Illinois, which also contributed to casting the molds for the Vince Lombardi Trophy and Emmy Awards statuettes. Since 1983, approximately 50 Oscars are made each year in Chicago by Illinois manufacturer R.S. Owens & Company. In support of the American effort in World War II, the statuettes were made of plaster and were traded in for gold ones after the war had ended. === Naming === <!--Removed image as it is incorrectly rotated  Don Black (lyricist)|Don Black shows his Academy Award for Best Original Song|Best Original Song Oscar for "Born Free (song)|Born Free" from the Born Free|1966 film of the same  The root of the name "Oscar" is contested. One biography of Bette Davis claims that she named the Oscar after her first husband, band leader Harmon Oscar Nelson; one of the earliest mentions in print of the term "Oscar" dates back to a Time  magazine article about the 1934 6th Academy Awards. Walt Disney is also quoted as thanking the Academy for his Oscar as early as 1932. Another claimed origin is that the Academy's Executive Secretary, Margaret Herrick, first saw the award in 1931 and made reference to the statuette's reminding her of her "Uncle Oscar" (a nickname for her cousin Oscar Pierce). "Oscar" in "The Oxford English Dictionary", June 2008 Draft Revision. Columnist Sidney Skolsky was present during Herrick's naming and seized the name in his byline, "Employees have affectionately dubbed their famous statuette 'Oscar'". Levy, Emanuel (2003) "All About Oscar: The History and Politics of the Academy Awards" Continuum, New York. ISBN 0-8264-1452-4 The trophy was officially dubbed the "Oscar" in 1939 by the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences. Another legend reports that the  Eleanor Lilleberg, executive secretary to Louis B. Mayer, saw the first statuette and exclaimed, "It looks like King Oscar II!".  In Honor of King Oscar II of Norway] by Jørn K. Baltzersen,  At the end of the day she asked, "What should we do with Oscar, put him in the vault?" and the name stuck. === Ownership of Oscar statuettes === Since 1950, the statuettes have been legally encumbered by the requirement that neither winners nor their heirs may sell the statuettes without first offering to sell them back to the Academy for US$1. If a winner refuses to agree to this stipulation, then the Academy keeps the statuette. Academy Awards not protected by this agreement have been sold in public auctions and private deals for six-figure sums. (Levy 2003, pg 28) In December 2011, Orson Welles' 1941 Oscar for "Citizen Kane" was put up for auction, after his heirs won a 2004 court decision that Welles did not sign any agreement to return the statue to the Academy. While the Oscar is under the ownership of the recipient, it is essentially not on the open market. The case of Mike Todd|Michael Todd's grandson trying to sell Todd's Oscar statuette illustrates that there are some who do not agree with this idea. When Todd's grandson attempted to sell Todd's Oscar statuette to a movie prop collector, the Academy won the legal battle by getting a permanent injunction. Although Oscar sales transactions have been successful, some buyers have subsequently returned the statuettes to the Academy, which keeps them in its treasury. (Levy 2003, pg 29) == Nomination == Since 2004, Academy Award nomination results have been announced to the public in late January. Prior to that, the results were announced in early February. === Voters === The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS), a professional honorary organization, maintains a voting membership of 5,783 . Academy membership is divided into different branches, with each representing a different discipline in film production. Actors constitute the largest voting bloc, numbering 1,311 members (22 percent) of the Academy's composition. Votes have been certified by the auditing firm  (and its predecessor Price Waterhouse) for the past 73 annual awards ceremonies. All AMPAS members must be invited to join by the Board of Governors, on behalf of Academy Branch Executive Committees. Membership eligibility may be achieved by a competitive nomination or a member may submit a name based on other significant contribution to the field of motion pictures. New membership proposals are considered annually. The Academy does not publicly disclose its membership, although as recently as 2007 press releases have announced the names of those who have been invited to join. The 2007 release also stated that it has just under 6,000 voting members. While the membership had been growing, stricter policies have kept its size steady since then. In May 2011, the Academy sent a letter advising its 6,000 or so voting members that an online system for Oscar voting will be implemented in 2013. === Rules === Currently, according to Rules 2 and 3 of the official Academy Awards Rules, a film must open in the previous calendar year, from midnight at the start of January 1 to midnight at the end of December 31, in Los Angeles County, California, to qualify (except for the Best Foreign Language Film). For example, the 2010 Academy Award for Best Picture|Best Picture winner, "The Hurt Locker", was actually first released in 2008, but did not qualify for the 81st Academy Awards|2009 awards as it did not play its  run in Los Angeles until mid-2009, thus qualifying for the 82nd Academy Awards|2010 awards. Rule 2 states that a film must be  defined as a minimum of 40 minutes, except for short subject awards, and it must exist either on a 35 mm film|35 mm or 70 mm film print or in 24 frame/s or 48 frame/s progressive scan digital cinema format with native resolution not less than 720p|1280x720. Producers must submit an Official Screen Credits online form before the deadline; in case it is not submitted by the defined deadline, the film will be ineligible for Academy Awards in any year. The form includes the production credits for all related categories. Then, each form is checked and put in a Reminder List of Eligible Releases. In late December ballots and copies of the Reminder List of Eligible Releases are mailed to around 6000 active members. For most categories, members from each of the branches vote to de
Actrius	"Actrius " (Catalan  "Actresses") is a 1996 film directed by Ventura Pons. In the film, there are no male actors and the four leading actresses dubbed themselves in the Castilian version. ==Synopsis== In order to prepare the role of an important old actress, a theatre student interviews three actresses who were her pupils: an international diva (Glòria Marc, played by Núria Espert), a television star (Assumpta Roca, played by Rosa Maria Sardà) and a dubbing director (Maria Caminal, played by Anna Lizaran). ==External links== *  Ficha técnica] Category:1996 films Category:1990s drama films  films  films Category:Films set in Barcelona  in fiction Category:Films directed by Ventura Pons ca:Actrius es:Actrices fr:Actrices (film, 1996)
International Atomic Time	International Atomic Time ( TAI , from the French  name Temps Atomique International ) is a high-precision atomic coordinate  time standard based on the notional passage of proper time on Earth's geoid. It is the basis for Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), which is used for civil timekeeping all over the Earth's surface, and for Terrestrial Time, which is used for astronomical calculations. Since 30 June 2012 when the last leap second was added,  TAI has been exactly 35 seconds ahead of UTC. The 35 seconds results from the initial difference of 10 seconds at the start of 1972, plus 25 leap seconds in UTC since 1972. Time coordinates on the TAI scales are conventionally specified using traditional means of specifying days, carried over from non-uniform time standards based on the rotation of the Earth. Specifically, both Julian Dates and the Gregorian calendar are used. TAI in this form was synchronised with Universal Time at the beginning of 1958, and the two have drifted apart ever since, due to the changing motion of the Earth. ==Operation== TAI as a time scale is a weighted average of the time kept by over 200 atomic clocks in over 50 national laboratories worldwide. BIPM - International Atomic Time n.d. The clocks are compared using GPS signals and Two-Way Satellite Time and Frequency Transfer. Circular T 2009. Due to the averaging it is far more stable than any clock would be alone (see signal averaging for a discussion). The majority of the clocks are caesium clocks; the definition of the SI second is written in terms of caesium. McCarthy &Seidelmann 2009, 207, 214 The participating institutions each broadcast, in real time, a frequency signal with time codes, which is their estimate of TAI. Time codes are usually published in the form of UTC, which differs from TAI by a well-known integer number of seconds. These time scales are denoted in the form "UTC(NPL)" in the UTC form, where "NPL" in this case identifies the National Physical Laboratory, UK. The TAI form may be denoted "TAI(NPL)". The latter is not to be confused with "TA(NPL)", which denotes an independent atomic time scale, not synchronised to TAI or to anything else. The clocks at different institutions are regularly compared against each other. The International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM, France), combines these measurements to  calculate the weighted average that forms the most stable time scale possible. This combined time scale is published monthly in  Circular T], and is the Canonical form|canonical TAI. This time scale is expressed in the form of tables of differences UTC-UTC("k") (equivalent to TAI-TAI("k")) for each participating institution "k". (The same circular also gives tables of TAI-TA("k"), for the various unsynchronised atomic time scales.) Errors in publication may be corrected by issuing a revision of the faulty Circular T or by errata in a subsequent Circular T. Aside from this, once published in Circular T the TAI scale is not revised. In hindsight it is possible to discover errors in TAI, and to make better estimates of the true proper time scale. Doing so does not create another version of TAI; it is instead considered to be creating a better realisation of Terrestrial Time (TT). ==History== Atomic timekeeping services started experimentally in 1955, using the first caesium atomic clock at the National Physical Laboratory (United  Physical Laboratory, UK (NPL). Early atomic time scales consisted of quartz clocks with frequencies calibrated by a single atomic clock; the atomic clocks were not operated continuously. The "Greenwich Atomic" (GA) scale began in 1955 at the Royal Greenwich Observatory. The United States Naval Observatory began the A.1 scale 13 September 1956, using an Atomichron commercial atomic clock, followed by the NBS-A scale at the National Bureau of Standards, Boulder,  Colorado. The International Time Bureau (BIH) began a time scale, T  m  or AM, in July 1955, using both local caesium clocks and comparisons to distant clocks using the phase of VLF radio signals. Both the BIH scale and A.1 was defined by an epoch (reference date)|epoch at the beginning of 1958: it was set to read Julian Date 2436204.5 (1 January 1958 00:00:00) at the corresponding UT2 instant. The procedures used by the BIH evolved, and the name for the time scale changed: "A3" in 1963 and "TA(BIH)" in 1969. McCarthy & Seidelmann 2009, 199&ndash;201. This  was inevitably imperfect, depending as it did on the  realisation of UT2. At the time, UT2 as published by various observatories differed by several centiseconds. The SI second was defined in terms of the caesium atom in 1967, and in 1971 it was renamed International Atomic Time (TAI). McCarthy & Seidelmann 2009, 202&ndash;4. Also in 1961, UTC began. UTC is a discontinuous time scale composed from segments that are linear  of atomic time, the  being arranged so that UTC approximated UT2 until the end of 1971, and UT1 thereafter. This was a compromise arrangement for a broadcast time scale: a linear transformation of the BIH's atomic time meant that the time scale was stable and  synchronised, while approximating UT1 means that tasks such as navigation which require a source of Universal Time continue to be well served by public time broadcasts. McCarthy & Seidelmann 2009, 227&ndash;9. In the 1970s, it became clear that the clocks participating in TAI were ticking at different rates due to gravitational time dilation, and the combined TAI scale therefore corresponded to an average of the altitudes of the various clocks. Starting from Julian Date 2443144.5 (1 January 1977 00:00:00), corrections were applied to the output of all participating clocks, so that TAI would correspond to proper time at mean sea level (the geoid). Because the clocks had been on average well above sea level, this meant that TAI slowed down, by about 10  −12  . The former uncorrected time scale continues to be published, under the name "EAL" ("Echelle Atomique Libre", meaning "Free Atomic Scale"). McCarthy & Seidelmann, 215. The instant that the gravitational correction started to be applied serves as the epoch for Barycentric Coordinate Time (TCB), Geocentric Coordinate Time (TCG), and Terrestrial Time (TT). All three of these time scales were defined to read JD  (1 January 1977 00:00:32.184) exactly at that instant. (The offset is to provide continuity with the older Ephemeris Time.) TAI was henceforth a realisation of TT, with the equation TT(TAI) = TAI + 32.184 s. McCarthy & Seidelmann, 218&ndash;9. The continued existence of TAI was questioned in a 2007 letter from the BIPM to the ITU-R which stated "In the case of a redefinition of UTC without leap seconds, the CCTF would consider discussing the possibility of suppressing TAI, as it would remain parallel to the continuous UTC." CCTF 09-27 ==See also== * Time and frequency transfer * Clock  * Network Time Protocol * Precision Time Protocol, a related though separate technology *  trap ==Notes== ==References== * * * * * * ==External links== *  Bureau International des Poids et Mesures: TAI] *  Time and Frequency Section - National Physical Laboratory, UK] *  IERS website] *  NIST Time and Frequency FAQs] *  History of time scales] *  NIST cesium fountain standard] *  Optical frequency comb for metrology and timekeeping] *  Japan Standard Time Project, NICT, Japan] Category:Time scales ar:توقيت ذري عالمي ca:Temps atòmic internacional  atomový čas  Atomzeit es:Tiempo Atómico Internacional eo:Tempo atoma internacia fr:Temps atomique international   atomsko vrijeme id:Waktu Atom Internasional it:Tempo atomico internazionale he:הזמן האטומי  la:Tempus Atomicum Internationale lt:Atominis laikas hu:Nemzetközi atomidő   czas atomowy pt:Tempo Atômico Internacional ro:Timpul atomic internațional  атомное время  atómový čas sl:Mednarodni atomski čas  atomtid ur:عالمی جوہری وقت vi:Thời gian Nguyên tử Quốc tế zh:原子时
Altruism	File:Belisaire demandant l'aumone Jacques-Louis  alms to the poor is often considered an altruistic action in many cultures and religions. Altruism is a concern for the Quality of life|welfare of others. It is a traditional virtue in many cultures, and a core aspect of various religious traditions, though the concept of 'others' toward whom concern should be directed can vary among cultures and religions. Altruism is the opposite of selfishness. Altruism can be distinguished from feelings of duty and loyalty. Altruism is a motivation to provide something of value to a party who must be anyone but the self, while duty focuses on a moral obligation towards a specific individual (for example, a god, a monarch|king), or collective (for example, a government). Pure altruism consists of sacrificing something for someone other than the self (e.g. sacrificing time, energy or possessions) with no expectation of any compensation or benefits, either direct, or indirect (for instance from recognition of the giving). Much debate exists as to whether true altruism is possible. Arguably, the act of sharing, helping or sacrificing may be primarily motivated by the gratification it returns. This seems to assume a different understanding of 'benefits', though, from the traditionally assumed meanings (which are external - recognition from others, reciprocation etc. - rather than internal), making this a problematic argument. The term "altruism" may also refer to an altruism  doctrine that claims that individuals are morally obliged to benefit others. Used in this sense, it is the opposite of ethical egoism|egoism. ==The notion of altruism== The concept has a long history in  and Ethics|ethical thought. The term was originally coined in the 19th century by the founding sociologist and philosopher of science, Auguste Comte, and has become a major topic for psychologists (especially evolutionary psychology researchers), evolutionary biologists, and  While ideas about altruism from one field can have an impact on the other fields, the different methods and focuses of these fields lead to different perspectives on altruism. In simple terms altruism is caring about the welfare of other people and acting to help them. ==Scientific viewpoints==  Marcel Mauss's book "The Gift" contains a passage: "Note on alms". This note describes the evolution of the notion of alms (and by extension of altruism) from the notion of sacrifice.  Alms are the fruits of a moral notion of the gift and of fortune on the one hand, and of a notion of sacrifice, on the other. Generosity is an obligation, because Nemesis avenges the poor and the gods for the superabundance of happiness and wealth of certain people who should rid themselves of it. This is the ancient morality of the gift, which has become a principle of justice. The gods and the spirits accept that the share of wealth and happiness that has been offered to them and had been hitherto destroyed in useless sacrifices should serve the poor and children.  * Compare altruism  (ethics) – perception of altruism as  * Compare  of alms in various scriptures.   In the science of ethology (the study of animal behaviour), and more generally in the study of social evolution, altruism refers to behaviour by an individual that increases the fitness  of another individual while decreasing the fitness of the actor.  In evolutionary psychology this may be applied to a wide range of human behaviors such as charity, emergency aid, help to coalition partners, tipping, courtship gifts, production of public goods, and   Pat Barcaly. The evolution of charitable behaviour and the power of reputation. In Theories of apparently altruistic behavior were accelerated by the need to produce theories compatible with evolutionary origins. Two related strands of research on altruism have emerged from traditional evolutionary analyses and from game theory. Some of the proposed mechanisms are: * Kin selection. That animals and humans are more altruistic towards close kin than to distant kin and non-kin has been confirmed in numerous studies across many different cultures. Even subtle cues indicating kinship may unconsciously increase altruistic behavior. One kinship cue is facial resemblance. One study found that slightly altering photographs so that they more closely resembled the faces of the study participants increased the trust the participants expressed regarding the depicted persons. Another cue is having the same family name, especially if rare, and this has been found to increase helping behavior. Another study found more cooperative behavior the greater the number the perceived kin in a group. Using kinship terms in political speeches increased audience agreement with the speaker in one study. This effect was especially strong for firstborn who are known to typically be close to their families.  * Vested interests. People are likely to themselves suffer if their friends, allies, and similar social ingroups suffer or even disappear. Helping such group members may therefore eventually be beneficial for the altruist. Making ingroup membership more noticeable increases  Extreme self-sacrifice towards the ingroup may be adaptive if a hostile outgroup threatens to kill the entire ingroup.  * Reciprocal altruism. See also Reciprocity (evolution). :* Direct Reciprocity (social  Research shows that if can be beneficial to help others if there is a chance that they can and will reciprocate the help. The effective tit for tat strategy is one game theory|game theoretic example. Many people seem to be following a similar strategy by cooperating if and only if others cooperate in return.  ::One consequence is that people are more cooperative if it is more likely that individuals will interact again in the future. People tend to be less cooperative if they perceive that the frequency of helpers in the population is lower. They tend to help less if they see  by others and this effect tend to be stronger than the opposite effect of seeing cooperative behaviors. Simply changing the cooperative framing of a proposal may increase  such as calling it a "Community Game" instead of a "Wall Street Game".  ::A tendency towards reciprocity implies that people will feel obligated to respond if someone helps them. This has been used by some charities which give small gifts to potential donors thereby hoping to induce reciprocity. Another method is to announce publicly that someone has given a large donation. The tendency to reciprocate can even generalize so people become more helpful against others in general after being helped. On the other hand, people will avoid or even retaliate against those perceived to no be cooperating. People sometimes by mistake do not help when they intended to or the helping may not be noticed which may cause unintended conflicts. As such, it may be an optimal strategy to be slightly forgiving of and have a slightly generous interpretation of   ::People are more likely to cooperate on a task if they can communicate with one another first. This may be due to better assessments of  or due to exchange of promises. They are more cooperative if they can gradually build trust instead of asked to immediately give extensive help. Direct reciprocity and cooperation in a group can be increased by changing the focus and incentives from intragroup competition to larger scale competitions such as between groups or against the general population. Thus giving grades and promotions based only on an individual's performance relative to a small local group, as is common, may reduce cooperative behaviors in the group.  :* Indirect reciprocity. The avoidance of poor reciprocators and cheaters causes a person's reputation to become very important. A person with a good reputation for reciprocity have a higher chance of receiving help even from persons they have had no direct interactions with previously.  :* Strong reciprocity. A form of reciprocity where some individuals seem to spend more resources on cooperating and punishing than would be most beneficial as predicted by several established theories of altruism. A number of theories have been proposed as explanations as well as criticisms regarding its existence. :*  An organism behaves altruistically and the recipient does not reciprocate but has an increased chance of acting in a way that is selfish but also as a byproduct benefits the altruist. * Signalling theory|Costly signaling and the handicap principle. Since altruism takes away resources from the altruist it can be a "honest signal" of resource availability and the abilities needed to gather resources. This may signal to others that the altruist is a valuable potential partner. It may also be a signal of interactive and cooperative intententions since those not interacting further in the future gain nothing from the costly signaling. It is unclear if costly signaling can indicate a long-term cooperative personality but people have increased trust for those who help. Costly signaling is pointless if everyone has the same traits, resources, and cooperative intentions but becomed a potentially more important signal if the population increasingly varies on these   :Hunters widely sharing the meat has been seen as a costly signal of ability and research has found that good hunters have higher reproductive success and more adulterous relations even if they themselves receive no more of the hunted meat than anyone else. Similarly, holding large feasts and giving large donations has been seen as ways of demonstrating one's resources. Heroic risk-taking has also been interpreted as a costly signal of ability.  :Both indirect reciprocity and costly signaling depend on the value of reputation and tend to make similar predictions. One is that people will be more helping when they know that their helping behavior will be communicated to people they will interact with later, is publicly announced, is discussed, or is simply being observed by someone else. This have been documented in many studies. The effect is sensitive to subtle cues such as people being more helpful when there were stylized eyespots instead of a logo on a computer screen. Weak reputational cues such as eyespots may become unimportant if there are stronger cues present and may lose their effect with continued exposure unless reinforced with real reputational effects.  Public displays such as public weeping for dead celebrities and participation in demonstrations may be influenced by a desire to be seen as altruistic. People who know that they are publicly monitored sometimes even wastefully donate money they know are not needed by recipient which may be because of reputational concerns.  Wendy Iredal and Mark van Vugt. Altruism as showing off: a signaling perspective on promoting green behaviour and acts of kindness. In :Women have been found to find altruistic men to be attractive partners. When looking for a long-term partner more conventional altruism may be preferred which may indicate that he is also willing to share resources with her and her children while when looking for a short-term partner heroic risk-taking, which may be costly signal showing good genes, may be more preferable. Men also perform more altruistic acts in the early stages of a romantic relationship or simply when in the presence of an attractive woman. While both sexes state that kindness is the most preferable trait in a partner there is some evidence that men place less value on this than women and that women may not be more altruistic in presence of an attractive man. Men may even avoid altruistic women in short-term relationships which may be because they expect less success.   :People may compete over getting the benefits of a high reputation which may cause competitive altruism. On other hand, in some experiments a proportion of people do not seem to care about reputation and they do not help more even if this is conspicuous. This may possibly be due to r
Ayn Rand	Ayn Rand (; ; born Alisa Zinov'yevna Rosenbaum , – March 6, 1982) was a  novelist, philosopher, <!-- DO NOT REMOVE WITHOUT CONSENSUS  ; ; ; . playwright, and screenwriter. She is known for her two best-selling novels "The Fountainhead" and "Atlas Shrugged" and for developing a philosophical system she called Objectivism (Ayn  Born and educated in Russia, Rand moved to the United States in 1926. She worked as a screenwriter in Hollywood and had a play produced on Broadway in 1935–1936. After two early novels that were initially less successful, she achieved fame with her 1943 novel "The Fountainhead". In 1957, she published her best-known work, the philosophical novel "Atlas Shrugged". Afterward she turned to nonfiction to promote her philosophy, publishing her own magazines and releasing several collections of essays until her death in 1982. Rand advocated reason as the only means of acquiring knowledge and rejected all forms of faith and religion. She supported rational  and ethical egoism, and rejected ethical altruism. In politics, she condemned the initiation of force as immoral and opposed all forms of collectivism and statism, instead supporting  capitalism, which she believed was the only social system that protected individual rights. She promoted romantic realism in art. She was sharply critical of the philosophers and philosophical traditions known to her besides Aristotle. Rand's fiction was poorly received by many literary critics,   and academia generally ignored or rejected her philosophy. The Objectivist movement attempts to spread her ideas, both to the public and in academic settings.  She is a major influence among  and Conservatism in the United  conservatives. ==Life== ===Early life=== Rand was born Alisa Zinov'yevna Rosenbaum () on February 2, 1905, to a bourgeois family living in Saint Petersburg. She was the eldest of the three daughters of Zinovy Zakharovich Rosenbaum and Anna Borisovna Rosenbaum, largely non-observant Jews. Rand's father was a successful pharmacist, eventually owning a pharmacy and the building in which it was located. ; ; Rand was twelve at the time of the Russian Revolution of 1917, during which her sympathies were with Alexander Kerensky. Rand's family life was disrupted by the rise of the Bolshevik party under Vladimir Lenin. Her father's pharmacy was confiscated by the Bolsheviks, and the family fled to the Crimea, which was initially under the control of the White Army during the Russian Civil War. She later recalled that while in high school she determined that she was an atheist and that she valued reason above any other human attribute. After graduating from high school in the Crimea, at 16 Rand returned with her family to Petrograd (the new name for Saint Petersburg), where they faced desperate conditions, on occasion nearly starving.   engraving shows a large building along the bank of a river, with numerous people and carriages nearby|Rand completed a three-year program at Saint Petersburg State  State University. After the Russian Revolution, universities were opened to women, including Jews, allowing Rand to be in the first group of women to enroll at Saint Petersburg State  State University, where she studied in the department of social pedagogy, majoring in history. At the university she was introduced to the writings of Aristotle and Plato, who would form two of her greatest influences and  respectively. ; A third figure whose philosophical works she studied heavily was Friedrich Nietzsche. Able to read French, German and Russian, Rand also discovered the writers Fyodor Dostoevsky, Victor Hugo, Edmond Rostand, and Friedrich Schiller, who became her perennial favorites. Along with many other "bourgeois" students, Rand was purged from the university shortly before graduating. However, after complaints from a group of visiting foreign scientists, many of the purged students were allowed to complete their work and graduate, ; which Rand did in October 1924. She subsequently studied for a year at the State Technicum for Screen Arts in Leningrad. For one of her assignments, she wrote an essay about the actress Pola Negri, which became her first published work.  By this time she had decided her professional surname for writing would be "Rand", possibly as a Cyrillic contraction of her birth surname, ; and she adopted the first name "Ayn", either from a Finnish  name or from the Hebrew word ("ayin", meaning "eye"). Rand said the origin of "Ayn" was Finnish , but some biographical sources question this, suggesting it may come from a Hebrew nickname. provides a detailed discussion. File:Pola Negri by Ayn Rand  brown book cover with  drawings and text in Russian. The drawing on the left is a portrait of a woman with dark hair; the drawing on the right is of  of Rand's first published work, a 2,500-word monograph on the Polish "femme fatale" Pola Negri published in 1925.   In the fall of 1925, Rand was granted a Visa  to visit American relatives. Rand was so impressed with the skyline of Manhattan upon her arrival in New York Harbor that she cried what she later called "tears of splendor". Intent on staying in the United States to become a screenwriter, she lived for a few months with relatives in Chicago,  one of whom owned a movie theater and allowed her to watch dozens of films for free. She then set out for Hollywood, California. Initially, Rand struggled in Hollywood and took odd jobs to pay her basic living expenses. A chance meeting with famed director Cecil B. DeMille led to a job as an extra (drama)|extra in his film, "The King of Kings (1927 film)|The King of Kings", and to subsequent work as a junior screenwriter. While working on "The King of Kings", she met an aspiring young actor, Frank O'Connor; the two were married on April 15, 1929. Rand United States nationality  an American citizen in 1931. Taking various jobs during the 1930s to support her writing, Rand worked for a time as the head of the costume department at RKO Studios. ; She made several attempts to bring her parents and sisters to the United States, but they were unable to acquire permission to emigrate. ; ===Early fiction=== Rand's first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay "Red Pawn" to Universal Studios in 1932, although it was never produced. This was followed by the courtroom drama "Night of January 16th", first produced by E.E. Clive in Hollywood in 1934 and then successfully reopened on Broadway  in 1935. Each night the "jury" was selected from members of the audience, and one of the two different endings, depending on the jury's "verdict", would then be performed. In 1941, Paramount Pictures produced a movie version of the play. Rand did not participate in the production and was highly critical of the result. ; Rand's first novel, the  "We the Living", was published in 1936. Set in Russian Soviet Federative Socialist  Russia, it focused on the struggle between the individual and the state. In a 1959 foreword to the novel, Rand stated that "We the Living" "is as near to an autobiography as I will ever write. It is not an autobiography in the literal, but only in the intellectual sense. The plot is invented, the background is not..." Initial sales were slow and the American publisher let it go out of print, although European editions continued to sell. Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing "We the Living"". In After the success of her later novels, Rand was able to release a revised version in 1959 that has since sold over three million copies. Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing "We the Living"". In Without Rand's knowledge or permission, the novel was made into a pair of Italian films, "Noi vivi" and "Addio, Kira", in 1942. Rediscovered in the 1960s, these films were re-edited into a new version which was approved by Rand and re-released as "We the Living" in 1986. Her novella "Anthem  was written during a break from the writing of her next major novel, "The Fountainhead". It presents a vision of a dystopian future world in which  collectivism has triumphed to such an extent that even the word 'I' has been forgotten and replaced with 'we'. ; It was published in England in 1938, but Rand initially could not find an American publisher. As with "We the Living", Rand's later success allowed her to get a revised version published in 1946, which has sold more than 3.5 million copies. Ralston, Richard E. "Publishing "Anthem"". In ==="The Fountainhead" and political activism=== During the 1940s, Rand became politically active. Both she and her husband worked full time in volunteer positions for the 1940 Presidential campaign of Republican Wendell Willkie. This work led to Rand's first public speaking experiences, including fielding the sometimes hostile questions from New York City audiences who had just viewed pro-Willkie newsreels, an experience she greatly enjoyed. This activity also brought her into contact with other intellectuals sympathetic to free-market capitalism. She became friends with journalist Henry Hazlitt and his wife, and Hazlitt introduced her to the Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises. Despite her philosophical differences with them, Rand strongly endorsed the writings of both men throughout her career, and both of them expressed admiration for her. Once von Mises referred to Rand as "the most courageous man in America," a compliment that particularly pleased her because he said "man" instead of "woman." ; ; Rand also developed a friendship with libertarian writer Isabel Paterson. Rand questioned the well-informed Paterson about American history and politics long into the night during their numerous meetings and gave Paterson ideas for her only nonfiction book, "The God of the Machine". Rand's first major success as a writer came with "The Fountainhead" in 1943, a romantic and philosophical novel that she wrote over a period of seven years. The novel centers on an uncompromising young architect named Howard Roark and his struggle against what Rand described as  who attempt to live through others, placing others above self. It was rejected by twelve publishers before finally being accepted by the Bobbs-Merrill Company on the insistence of editor Archibald Ogden, who threatened to quit if his employer did not publish it. While completing the novel, Rand was prescribed the amphetamine Benzedrine to fight fatigue. The drug helped her to work long hours to meet her deadline for delivering the finished novel, but when the book was done, she was so exhausted that her doctor ordered two weeks' rest. Her continued use of the drug for a number of years may have contributed to what some of her later associates described as volatile mood swings. ; "The Fountainhead" eventually became a worldwide success, bringing Rand fame and financial security. ; In 1943, Rand sold the rights for a The Fountainhead (film)|film version to Warner Bros., and she returned to Hollywood to write the screenplay. Finishing her work on that screenplay, she was hired by producer Hal Wallis as a screenwriter and script-doctor. Her work for Wallis included the screenplays for the Academy  Love Letters (1945 film)|"Love Letters" and "You Came Along". ; This role gave Rand time to work on other projects, including a planned nonfiction treatment of her philosophy to be called "The Moral Basis of  Although the planned book was never completed, a condensed version was published as an essay titled "The Only Path to Tomorrow", in the January 1944 edition of "Reader's Digest" magazine. ; While working in Hollywood, Rand extended her involvement with free-market and anti-communist activism. She became involved with the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a Hollywood anti-Communist group, and wrote articles on the group's behalf. She also joined the anti-Communist American Writers Association. A visit by Isabel Paterson to meet with Rand's California associates led to a final falling out between the two when Paterson made comments
Alain Connes	Alain Connes (born 1 April 1947) is a French mathematician, currently Professor at the Collège de France, IHÉS, The Ohio State University and Vanderbilt University. ==Work== Alain Connes is one of the leading specialists on operator algebras. In his early work on von Neumann algebras in the 1970s, he succeeded in obtaining the almost complete classification of injective Von Neumann  Following this he made contributions in  K-theory and index theory, which culminated in the Baum-Connes conjecture. He also introduced cyclic  cohomology in the early 1980s as a first step in the study of noncommutative  differential geometry. Connes has applied his work in areas of mathematics and theoretical physics, including number theory, differential geometry and particle physics.  Scientific Americain, "The Geometer of Particle Physics", July 24, 2006] ==Awards and honours== Connes was awarded the Fields Medal in 1982, the Crafoord Prize in 2001 and the gold medal of the CNRS in 2004. He is a member of the French Academy of Sciences and several foreign academies and societies, including the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters|Danish Academy of Sciences, Norwegian Academy of Science and  Academy of Sciences, Russian Academy of Sciences, and United States National Academy of Sciences|US National Academy of Sciences. ==See also== * Cyclic homology * Factor (functional analysis) * Higgs boson * C*-algebra * M Theory * Groupoid *Criticism of non-standard analysis ==External links== *  Alain Connes Official Web Site] containing  downloadable papers], and his book   geometry"], ISBN 0-12-185860-X. *  nlab about Alain Connes] *  Alain Connes' Standard Model] * An  interview with Alain Connes] and a  discussion about it] * * Category:1947 births  people  mathematicians  of the United States National Academy of Sciences  mathematicians  de France faculty  mathematicians  Medalists  analysts  geometers  of the École Normale Supérieure  University faculty  Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences  of the French Academy of Sciences  of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters  of the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters Category:Clay Research Award recipients ar:ألان كن  Connes de:Alain Connes es:Alain Connes eu:Alain Connes fr:Alain Connes ko:알랭 콘느 hr:Alain Connes it:Alain Connes ht:Alain Connes nl:Alain Connes  nn:Alain Connes pnb:الائن کونس pl:Alain Connes pt:Alain Connes ru:Конн, Ален   sk:Alain Connes sl:Alain Connes fi:Alain Connes uk:Ален Конн 
Allan Dwan	Allan Dwan (April 3, 1885 – December 28, 1981) was a pioneering  American film|motion picture film  producer and screenwriter. ==Early life== Born Joseph Aloysius Dwan in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Dwan moved with his family to the United States when he was 11 years old. At the University of Notre Dame, he trained as an engineer and began working for a lighting company in Chicago. However, he had a strong interest in the fledgling motion picture industry and when Essanay Studios offered him the opportunity to become a scriptwriter, he took the job. At that time, some of the East Coast of the United States|East Coast movie makers began to spend winters in California where the climate allowed them to continue productions requiring warm weather. Soon, a number of movie companies worked there year-round and, in 1911, Dwan began working part time in Hollywood,  While still in New York, in 1917 he was the founding president of the East Coast chapter of the Motion Picture Directors Association. ==Career== Dwan operated Flying A Studios in La Mesa, California from August, 1911 to July, 1912. Flying A was one of the first motion pictures studios in California history. On August 12, 2011, a plaque was unveiled on the Wolff building at Third Ave and La Mesa Bl commemorating Dwan and the Flying A Studios origins in La Mesa, California. After making a series of westerns and comedies, Dwan directed fellow Canadian Mary Pickford in several very successful movies as well as her husband, Douglas Fairbanks, notably in the acclaimed 1922 "Robin Hood (1922 film)|Robin Hood". Following the introduction of the sound film|talkies, in 1937 he directed child-star Shirley Temple in "Heidi" and "Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm (1938 film)|Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm" the following year. Dwan also helped launch the career of two other very successful Hollywood directors, Victor Fleming, who went on to direct The Wizard of Oz (1939 film) and Gone with the Wind (film), and Marshall Neilan, who became an actor, director, writer and producer. Over his long and successful career spanning over 50 years, he directed over 400 motion pictures, many of them highly acclaimed, such as the 1949 box office smash, "Sands of Iwo Jima". He directed his last movie in 1961. He died in Los Angeles at the age of ninety-six, and is interred in the San Fernando Mission Cemetery, Mission Hills,  Hills, California. Allan Dwan has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6263 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood. ==Parial filmography as director== *"The Gold Lust" (1911) *"The Restless Spirit" (1913) *"Back to Life (1913 film)|Back to Life" (1913) *"Bloodhounds of the North" (1913) *"The Lie (1914 film)|The Lie" (1914) *"The Honor of the Mounted" (1914) *"Remember Mary Magdelen" (1914) *"Discord and Harmony" (1914) *"The Embezzler (1914 film)|The Embezzler" (1914) *"The Lamb, the Woman, the Wolf" (1914) *"The End of the Feud" (1914) *"The Tragedy of Whispering Creek" (1914) *"The Unlawful Trade" (1914) *"The Forbidden Room" (1914) *"The Hopes of Blind Alley" (1914) *"Richelieu  (1914) * "Wildflower (1914  (1914) *"A Small Town Girl" (1915) *"David Harum" (1915) *"A Girl of Yesterday" (1915) *"The Pretty Sister of Jose (1915 film)|The Pretty Sister of Jose" (1915) *"Manhattan Madness" (1916) *"The Habit of Happiness" (1916) *"Fairbanks Fine Arts" (1916) *"Fairbanks Fragments" (1916–1918) also screenwriter *"Accusing Evidence" (1916) *"An Innocent Magdalene" (1916) *"A Modern Musketeer" (1917) *"Headin' South" (1918) *"Mr. Fix-It (1918 film)|Mr. Fix-It" (1918) *"Robin Hood (1922 film)|Robin Hood" (1922) *"Stage Struck (1925 film)|Stage Struck" (1925) *"The Joy Girl" (1927) *"The Iron Mask" (1929) *"Tide of Empire" (1929) *"Counsel's Opinion" (1933) *"Heidi (1937 film)|Heidi" (1937) *"Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm" (1938) *"The Three Musketeers (film)|The Three Musketeers" (1939) *"The Gorilla (1939 film)|The Gorilla" (1939) *"Young People (film)|Young People" (1940) *"Look Who's Laughing" (1941) also producer *"Friendly Enemies" (1942) *"Around the World" (1943) also producer *"Up in Mabel's Room" (1944) *"Abroad with Two Yanks" (1944) *"Getting Gertie's Garter" (1945) also screenwriter *"Brewster's Millions (1945  Millions" (1945) *"Driftwood" (1947) *"Calendar Girl (1947 film)|Calendar Girl" (1947) *"Northwest Outpost" (1947) also associate producer *"Sands of Iwo Jima" (1949) *"I Dream of Jeanie (film)|I Dream of Jeanie" (1952) *"Montana Belle" (1952) *"Silver Lode (1954 film)|Silver Lode" (1954) *"Passion (1954 film)|Passion" (1954) *"Cattle Queen of Montana" (1954) *"Tennessee's Partner" (1955) *"Pearl of the South Pacific" (1955) *"Escape to Burma" (1955) *"Slightly Scarlet (1956 film)|Slightly Scarlet" (1956) *"Hold Back the Night" (1956) *"The Restless Breed" (1957) *"The River's Edge" (1957) *"Enchanted Island  Island" (1958) ==References== ==Further reading== * Foster, Charles, "Stardust and Shadows: Canadians in Early Hollywood" (2000) ISBN 1-55002-348-9 ==See also== *Canadian pioneers in early Hollywood ==External links== *  Allan Dwan] at Virtual History  film directors  film producers  screenwriters  (genre) film directors  film directors  people of Canadian descent  citizens of the United States  emigrants to the United States  from Toronto Category:1885 births Category:1981 deaths Category:Short film directors de:Allan Dwan es:Allan Dwan fr:Allan Dwan it:Allan Dwan nl:Allan Dwan  pt:Allan Dwan ru:Двон, Аллан fi:Allan Dwan
Algeria	Algeria (, '; '), officially the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria (, '),  In Algeria, Berber  has been  recognized as a Languages of  language. The Government of  government recognizes that the varieties of Berber languages in Algeria are national and regional languages which must be presereved. Algeria's official name in Berber  is as follows: * Berber languages, Tifinagh script: ' also formally referred to as the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria , is a large country in the Maghreb region of Northwest Africa with Algiers as its capital. When referring to its land area, Algeria is the largest country in Africa, Maghreb and the Arab World. It is also the largest of the countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea; it is also the  country in the world. Encarta MSN. The country is bordered in the northeast by Tunisia, in the east by Libya, in the west by Morocco, in the southwest by Western Sahara, Mauritania, and Mali, in the southeast by Niger, and in the north by the Mediterranean Sea. Its size is almost with an estimated population of 37.1 million as of 2012.  Algeria is a member of the African Union, the Arab League, OPEC and the United Nations. The country is also a founding member of the Arab Maghreb Union. == Etymology == The country's name is derived from the city of Algiers. The most common etymology links the city name to "al-Jazā'ir"  "The Islands"), a truncated form of the city's older name "Jazā'ir Banī Mazghanna" (جزائر بني مزغنة, "Islands of the Mazghanna Tribe"),   employed by medieval geographers such as al-Idrisi. Others trace it to "Ldzayer", the Maghrebi Arabic and Berber  for "Algeria" possibly related to the Zirid Dynasty King Ziri ibn-Manad and founder of the city of Algiers  Etymologie du toponyme "Aldjazair"]. Scribd.com. Retrieved on 2012-05-14. == History == Algeria has been populated since 10.000 BC, as depicted in the Tassili national Park. The indigenous peoples of northern Africa are a distinct native population, called the Berber  by Greeks and Romans then by Arabs. === Prehistoric period ===  Great Fishing God of Sefar", one of the oldest paintings on earth  The Tassili n’Ajjer: birthplace of ancient Egypt?].  Retrieved on 2012-05-14. The cave painting found around the Tassili n'Ajjer in northern Tamanrasset, and in other places, depicts scenes from every day life in the prehistoric Algeria, between 8000-BC and 4000-BC. They were executed by hunters during the Capsian  period of the Neolithic age who lived in a savanna region, known then as the Green Sahara. Those paintings show giant African  elephants, rhinoceros, and hippopotamus, animals that no longer exist in the now-desert area. The pictures provide the most complete record of a prehistoric Algerian history. Earlier inhabitants of Algeria also left a significant amount of remains. At "Ain Hanech"   Research at Ain Hanech, Algeria].  Retrieved on 2012-05-14. region (Saïda Province), early remnants (200.000-BC) of hominid occupation in North Africa were found. Neanderthal tool makers produced hand axes in the Levallois  and Mousterian styles (43.000-BC) similar to those in the Levant. According to some sources, Algeria was the site of the highest state of development of Middle Paleolithic Flake tool techniques. Tools of this era, starting about 30.000-BC, are called Aterian (after the archeological site of "Bir el Ater", south of Annaba) and are marked by a high standard of workmanship, great variety, and  The earliest blade industries in North Africa are called Iberomaurusian (located mainly in Oran region). This industry appears to have spread throughout the coastal regions of the Maghreb between 15.000-BC and 10.000-BC. Neolithic civilization (animal domestication and agriculture) developed in the Saharan and Mediterranean Maghrib between 6.000 and 2.000-BC. This life richly depicted in the Tassili n'Ajjer paintings, predominated Algeria until the classical period. The amalgam of peoples of North Africa coalesced eventually into a distinct native population that came to be called Berber  Distinguished by cultural and linguistic attributes, the Berbers were typically depicted as "barbaric" enemies, troublesome nomads, or ignorant peasants by Roman, Greek, Byzantine, and Arab Muslim invaders. They were, however, to play a major role in the area's history. === Classical period === Image:GM Djemila Roman  Rome|Ancient Roman theatre in Djémila File:Scipio at the deathbed of Masinissa   at the deathbed of Massinissa From their principal center of power at Carthage, the Carthaginians expanded and established small settlements along the North African coast; by 600-BC, a Phoenician presence existed at Tipasa, east of Cherchell, Hippo Regius (modern Annaba) and Rusicade (modern Skikda). These settlements served as market towns as well as anchorages. As Carthaginian power grew, its impact on the indigenous population increased dramatically. Berber civilization was already at a stage in which agriculture, manufacturing, trade, and political organization supported several states. Trade links between Carthage and the Berbers in the interior grew, but territorial expansion also resulted in the enslavement or military recruitment of some Berbers and in the extraction of tribute from others. File:Cherchell  Statues in Cherchell Museum By the early fourth century BC, Berbers formed the single largest element of the Carthaginian army. In the Mercenary War|Revolt of the Mercenaries, Berber soldiers rebelled from 241 to 238-BC after being unpaid following the defeat of Carthage in the First Punic War. They succeeded in obtaining control of much of Carthage's North African territory, and they minted coins bearing the name Libyan, used in Greek to describe natives of North Africa. The Carthaginian state declined because of successive defeats by the Romans in the Punic Wars. In 146-BC the city of Carthage was destroyed. As Carthaginian power waned, the influence of Berber leaders in the hinterland grew. By the second century BC, several large but loosely administered Berber kingdoms had emerged. Two of them were established in Numidia, behind the coastal areas controlled by Carthage. West of Numidia lay Mauretania, which extended across the Moulouya River in modern day Morocco to the Atlantic Ocean. The high point of Berber civilization, unequaled until the coming of the Almohads and Almoravids more than a millennium later, was reached during the reign of Massinissa in the second century BC. After Masinissa's death in 148 BC, the Berber kingdoms were divided and reunited several times. Massinissa's line survived until 24 AD, when the remaining Berber territory was annexed to the Roman Empire for 2 centuries. === Arrival of Islam === File:Grande mosquée  Mosque of Algiers When Muslim Arabs arrived in Algeria in the mid-7th century, a large number of locals converted to the new faith. After the fall of the Umayyad Arab Dynasty in 751, numerous local Berber dynasties emerged. Amongst those dynasties were the Aghlabids, Almohads, Abdalwadid, Zirids, Rustamids, Hammadids, Almoravids and the Fatimids. converted the Berber Kutama of the Lesser Kabylia to its cause, the Shia Islam|Shia Fatimids overthrew the Rustamids, and conquered Egypt, leaving Algeria and Tunisia to their Zirid dynasty|Zirid vassals. When the latter rebelled, the Shia Fatimids sent in the Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym Arabian tribes who unexpectedly defeated the Zirids. The Berber people controlled much of the Maghreb region throughout the Middle Ages. The Berbers were made up of several tribes. The two main branches were the Botr and Barnès tribes, who were themselves divided into tribes, and again into sub-tribes. Each region of the Maghreb contained several tribes (for example, Sanhadja, Houaras, Zenata,  Kutama, Awarba, and Berghwata). All these tribes were independent and made territorial decisions. Several Berber dynasties emerged during the Middle Ages in Maghreb, Sudan, Andalusia, Italy, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Egypt, and other nearby lands. Ibn Khaldun provides a table summarizing the Zirid, Banu Ifran, Maghrawa, Almoravid, Hammadid, Almohad, Merinid, Abdalwadid, Wattasid, Meknassa and Hafsid dynasties. === Barbary corsairs === File:Oran Santa  Spanish fort of Fort Santa Cruz, Oran|Cruz, Oran The Spanish expansionist policy in North Africa began with the rule of the Catholic monarchs Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon and their regent Cardinal  Once the "Reconquista" of the Iberian Peninsula was completed, several towns and outposts on the Algerian coast were conquered and occupied by the Spanish Empire: Mers El Kébir (1505), Oran (1509), Peñón of Algiers (1510) and Béjaïa|Bugia (1510). The Muslim leaders of Algiers called for help from the Barbary corsairs Hayreddin Barbarossa and Oruç Reis, who previously helped Andalusian Muslims and Jews escape from Spanish oppression in 1492. In 1516, Oruç Reis conquered Algiers with the support of 1,300 Turkish soldiers on board 16 galliots and became its ruler, with Algiers joining the Ottoman Empire. The Spaniards left Algiers in 1529, Bugia in 1554, Mers El Kébir and Oran in 1708. The Spanish returned in 1732 when the armada of the José Carrillo de Albornoz, 1st Duke of Montemar|Duke of Montemar was victorious in the Battle of Aïn-el-Turk; Spain recaptured Oran and Mers El Kébir. Both cities were held until 1792, when they were sold by King Charles IV of Spain to the History of Ottoman Algeria|Bey of Algiers.  Hayreddin  Hayreddin Pasha Algeria was made part of the Ottoman Empire by Hayreddin Barbarossa and his brother Aruj in 1517. After the death of Aruj|Oruç Reis in 1518, his brother succeeded him. The Sultan Selim I sent him 6,000 soldiers and 2,000  with which he conquered most of the Algerian territory taken by the Spanish, from Annaba to Mostaganem. Further Spanish attacks led by Hugo of Moncada in 1519 were also pushed back. In 1541, Charles V, Holy Roman  V, emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, attacked Algiers with a convoy of 65 warships, 451 large ships and 23,000 men, 2000 of whom were mounted. The attack resulted in failure however, and the Algerian leader Hassan Agha became a national hero as Algiers grew into a center of military power in the Mediterranean. The Ottomans established Algeria's modern boundaries in the north and made its coast a base for the Barbary pirate|Ottoman corsairs; their privateering peaked in Algiers in the 17th century. Piracy on American vessels in the Mediterranean resulted in the First Barbary War|First (1801–1805) and Second Barbary Wars (1815) with the United States. The pirates forced the people on the ships they captured into slavery; when the pirates attacked coastal villages in southern and Western Europe the inhabitants were forced into the Arab slave trade. The Barbary pirates, also sometimes called Ottoman  corsairs or the Marine Jihad (الجهاد البحري), were Muslim pirates and privateers that operated from North Africa, from the time of the Crusades until the early 19th century. Based in North African ports such as Tunis in Tunisia, Tripoli in Libya and Algiers in Algeria, they preyed on Christian and other non-Islamic shipping in the western Mediterranean Sea.  Robert Davis (2003).  Christian Slaves, Muslim Masters: White Slavery in the Mediterranean, the Barbary Coast and Italy,  Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0333719662 File:Ali Khoja, ruler of Algiers 1816-1818, resplendent in a green turban and wearing a fine sword, is surrounding by the severed heads of vanquished enemies after the bombardment of 1816  Khoja, ruler of Algiers 1816–1818, surrounded by the severed heads of enemies Their stronghold was along the stretch of northern Africa known as the Barbary Coast (a medieval term for the Maghreb after its Berber people|Berber inhabitants), but their predation was said to extend throughout the Mediterranean, south along West Africa's Atlantic seaboard, and into the Atlantic 
List of Atlas Shrugged characters	This is a list of characters in Ayn Rand's novel "Atlas Shrugged." ==Major characters== The following are major characters from the novel. Characters are listed as "major" if they meet one of the following criteria: *they are listed as "major" characters in a widely available study guide, such as CliffsNotes, SparkNotes, or Gale  "Novels for Students"; *they are listed as "primary heroic" or "arch-villain" characters in Gladstein's "The New Ayn Rand Companion"; *they are the focus of an essay in a scholarly book about the novel, such as "Essays on Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged" or "Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged".  ====Dagny Taggart====  Schilling as Dagny Taggart in the 2011 film. Dagny Taggart is the protagonist of the novel. She is Vice-President in Charge of Operations for Taggart  under her brother, James Taggart. However, due to James' incompetence, it is Dagny who is responsible for all the workings of the railroad. Dagny has three romantic relationships, each with a man of ability: Francisco d'Anconia, Hank Rearden, and John Galt. Galt marks the pinnacle of everything Dagny seeks in the world and is the kind of man alluded to in her youth when she imagines a man standing off in the distance, at the end of a great set of railroad tracks and all her struggles. The essential drama of Dagny's character is her struggle to reconcile the life she lives and the railroad which she loves with the moral code of those who wish to destroy it. She believes these destroyers simply want to heap burdens upon her for the sake of others, which she has the ability to carry. Like Hank, she believes they want to live, but are too stupid and incompetent to realize how their duties and altruistic projects impede that goal. It is not until she sees the man most important to her in the world - John Galt - strapped to a torture machine, about to be killed by the looters (who recognize, too, that he is the only man who can save them from economic collapse), that she realizes that the moral code of the looters is one of death: they recognize what is good and necessary for life, but wish to destroy it anyway. She is a typical Randian heroine, similar to Dominique Francon ("The Fountainhead") or Kira Argounova ("We the Living"). ====Francisco d'Anconia==== Francisco d'Anconia is one of the central characters in "Atlas Shrugged", and owner by inheritance of the world's largest copper mining empire. He is a childhood friend, and the first love, of Dagny Taggart. A child prodigy of exceptional talents, Francisco was dubbed the "climax" of the d'Anconia line, an already prestigious family of skilled  He attended List of locations in Atlas  Henry  Henry University and was a classmate of John Galt and Ragnar Danneskjöld and student of both Hugh Akston and Robert Stadler. He began working at a young age, while still in school, proving that he could have made a successful career on his own merits without the aid of his family's wealth and power. Francisco is one of the strikers and is slowly destroying the d'Anconia empire to put it out of the raiders' reach. His actions were designed both to "trap" looters into relying upon his worthless ventures in order to disrupt their schemes and to try to show the inevitable consequences of looting. He adopted the persona of a worthless playboy, by which he is known to the world, as an effective cover. However, he is forced to give up Dagny, knowing that she would not be ready to join the strikers. He remains deeply in love with her throughout the book, while also being a good and loyal friend of her other two lovers, Hank Rearden and John Galt. His full name is Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d'Anconia. ====John Galt==== The enigmatic John Galt is the primary male hero of "Atlas Shrugged." He initially appears as an unnamed menial worker for Taggart  who often dines with Eddie Willers in the employee's cafeteria, and leads Eddie to reveal important information about Dagny Taggart and Taggart  Only Eddie's side of their conversations is given in the novel. Eddie tells him which suppliers and contractors Dagny is most dependent on; these men are consistently the next to disappear. Later in the novel, the reader discovers this worker's true identity. Before working for Taggart  Galt worked as an engineer for the Twentieth Century Motor Company. While there, he invented his generator that produces electricity from static electricity in the environment. His Prototype may or may not have been completed when he left due to the management deciding on a communistic pay system. This Prototype was found by Dagny when she and Hank Rearden made a trip to the long-closed Twentieth Century Motor factory. Dagny would hire Quenten Daniels to try to figure out how the machine worked. Galt would take over the radio airwaves during Mr. Thompson's much heralded speech at the end of the book and give his long soliloquy. ====Henry "Hank" Rearden==== Henry (also known as "Hank") is one of the central characters in "Atlas Shrugged". Like many of Rand's capitalist characters, he is a self-made man. He owns the most important steel company in the United States. He invents Rearden Metal, an alloy stronger than steel (with similar properties to stainless steel). He lives in Philadelphia with his wife Lillian, his brother Philip, and his elderly mother, all of whom he supports. Hank Rearden knows something is wrong with the world but he is unable to define the problem. His friend, Francisco d'Anconia, helps him understand and by this mechanism the reader is also prepared to understand the secret when it is revealed explicitly in John Galt|Galt's Speech. Rearden also serves to illustrate Rand's Atlas  of sex|theory of sex. Lillian Rearden cannot appreciate Hank Rearden's virtues, and she is portrayed as being disgusted by sex. Dagny Taggart clearly does appreciate Rearden's virtues, and this appreciation evolves into sexual desire. Rearden is torn because he accepts the premises of the traditional view of sex as a lower instinct, but he responds sexually to Dagny, who represents his highest values. Rearden struggles to resolve this internal conflict, and in doing so, illustrates Rand's sexual theory. ====Eddie Willers==== Eddie "Eddie" Willers is the Special Assistant to the Vice-President in Charge of Operations at Taggart  He grew up with Dagny Taggart. His father and grandfather worked for the Taggarts, and he followed in their footsteps. He is completely loyal to Dagny and to Taggart  He is also secretly in love with Dagny. Willers is generally assumed to represent the common man: someone who does not possess the Promethean creative ability of The Strikers, but matches them in moral courage and is capable of appreciating and making use of their creations. He sticks it out with the railway to the bitter end, even when the old world is obviously collapsing and Dagny has shifted her attention and loyalty to saving the captive Galt. ====Ragnar  One of the original strikers, he is now world famous as a pirate. Ragnar attended List of locations in Atlas  Henry  Henry University and became friends with John Galt and Francisco d'Anconia while studying under Hugh Akston and Robert Stadler. Danneskjöld seizes relief ships that are being sent from the United States to The People's States of Europe. As the novel progresses, Danneskjöld begins to become active in American waters. Danneskjöld's action is to restore to other creative people the money, in gold, which was unjustly taken away from  their income tax payments. He explains this is not altruism; his motivation is to ensure that once those espousing Galt's philosophy are restored to their rightful place in society, they will have enough capital to rebuild the world. Kept in the background for much of the book, Danneskjöld makes a personal appearance when he risks his life to meet "Hank Rearden" in the night and hand him a bar of gold as an "advance payment" to encourage Rearden to persevere in his increasingly difficult situation. Danneskjöld is married to the actress Kay Ludlow; their relationship is kept hidden from the outside world, which only knows of Ludlow as a film star who retired and dropped out of sight. It is mentioned that some of the strikers have strong reservations about his way of "conducting the common struggle." According to Barbara Branden, who was closely associated with Rand at the time the book was written, there were sections written describing Danneskjöld's adventures at sea, which were cut from the final published text. Reedstrom, Karen.  1992 Interview with Full Context]. Barbara Branden interview in "Full Context", October 1992. Republished on  Retrieved 1 June 2007. In a 1974 comment at a lecture, Ayn Rand admitted that Danneskjöld's name was a tribute to Victor Hugo. The hero of Hugo's novel, "Hans of Iceland", becomes the first of the Counts of Danneskjöld. In the published book, Danneskjöld is always seen through the eyes of others (Dagny Taggart or Hank Rearden), except for a brief paragraph in the very last chapter.  ====James Taggart==== The President of Taggart  and the book's most important antagonist. Taggart is an expert influence peddler who is, however, incapable of making operational decisions on his own. He relies on his sister, Dagny Taggart, to actually run the railroad, but nonetheless opposes her in almost every endeavor. In a sense, he is the antithesis of Dagny. As the novel progresses, the moral philosophy of the looters is revealed: it is a code of stagnation. The goal of this code is to not exist, to not move forward, to become a zero. Taggart struggles to remain unaware that this is his goal. He maintains his pretense that he wants to live, and becomes horrified whenever his mind starts to grasp the truth about himself. This contradiction leads to the recurring absurdity of his life: the desire to destroy those on whom his life depends, and the horror that he will succeed at this. In the final chapters of the novel, he suffers a complete mental breakdown upon realizing that he can no longer deceive himself in this respect. ====Lillian Rearden==== The unsupportive wife of Hank Rearden. They have been married eight years as the novel begins. Lillian is a frigid moocher who seeks to destroy her husband. She compares being Rearden's wife with owning the world's most powerful horse. Since she cannot comfortably ride a horse that goes too fast, she must bridle it down to her level, even if that means it will never reach its full potential and its power will be grievously wasted. Lillian tolerates sex with her husband only because she is "realistic" enough to know he is just a brute who requires satisfaction of his brute instincts. She indicates that she abhors Francisco d'Anconia, because she believes he is a sexual adventurer. As her motives become more clear, Lillian is found to share the sentiments of many other moochers and their worship of destruction. Her actions are explained as the desire to destroy achievement in the false belief that such an act bestows a greatness to the destroyer equal to the accomplishment destroyed. She seeks, then, to ruin Rearden in an effort to prove her own value. Lillian achieves her goal to destroy Rearden's business, when she passes on information to James Taggart about her husband's affair. This information is used to persuade Rearden to sign the Gift Certificate (which delivers all the property rights of Rearden Metal to the looters) and thereby destroys his business. Lillian discovers that she can accomplish her goal to destroy the business but she can neither achieve the greatness she desires nor her goal to destroy Hank's character. She uses James Taggart for sex as victory and revenge against Hank and Dagny. This does give her the satisfaction she desires and she continues to manipulate Hank until he finally leaves her and joins Galt's strikers. ====Dr. Floyd Ferris==== Ferris is a biologist who works as "co-ordinator" at the State Science Ins
Anthropology	Anthropology is the academic study of humanity. It deals with all that is characteristic of the human experience, from physiology and the evolutionary origins to the social and cultural organization of human societies as well as individual and collective forms of human experience. It has origins in the humanities, the natural sciences, and the social sciences. Wolf, Eric (1994) "Perilous Ideas: Race, Culture, People." "Current Anthropology" 35: 1-7. p.227 The term  is from the Ancient Greek|Greek "anthrōpos" (), "man", understood to mean humankind or humanity, and  (-λογία), "discourse" or "study." Anthropology's basic concerns are the definition of human life and origin, how social relations among humans are organized, who the ancestors of modern "Homo sapiens" are, what the  of human physical traits are, how humans behave, why there are variations among different groups of humans, how the evolutionary past of "Homo sapiens" has influenced its social organization and culture and so forth. Anthropology originated in the colonial encounter between Western people and colonized non-western peoples, as Europeans tried to understand the origins of observable cultural diversity. Today anthropology is a global discipline, and  study both Western and non-Western societies. In the United States, where anthropology was first defined as a discipline, the field is traditionally divided into four sub-fields: cultural anthropology, archaeology, linguistic anthropology, and biological anthropology.   AAAnet.org] In Europe the discipline originated as ethnology and was originally defined as the study of social organization in non-state societies, later redefined as social anthropology. Socio-cultural anthropology is considered anthropology proper in most of Europe, and in the parts of the world that were influenced by the European tradition. Layton, Robert (1998) "An Introduction to Theory in Anthropology". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Socio-cultural anthropology has been heavily influenced by  and post-modern theories, as well as a shift toward the analysis of modern societies. During the 1970s and 1990s, there was an  shift away from the positivist traditions that had largely informed the discipline. Geertz, Behar, Clifford & James During this shift, enduring questions about the nature and production of knowledge came to occupy a central place in cultural and social anthropology. In contrast, archaeology and biological anthropology remained largely positivist. Due to this difference in epistemology, anthropology as a discipline has lacked cohesion over the last several decades. ==Subfields== In the United States, anthropology is traditionally divided into four sub-fields, each with additional branches: Biological  or physical anthropology, social anthropology or cultural anthropology, archaeology and linguistic  linguistics.  These fields frequently overlap, but tend to use different methodologies and techniques. ===Cultural  Cultural anthropology is also called socio-cultural anthropology or social anthropology (especially in the United Kingdom). It is the study of culture, and is based mainly on ethnography. Ethnography can refer to both a methodology and a product of research, namely a monograph or book. Ethnography is a grounded, inductive method that heavily relies on  Ethnology involves the systematic comparison of different cultures. The process of  can be especially helpful to understanding a culture from an emic point of view, which would otherwise be unattainable by simply reading from a book. In some European countries, all cultural anthropology is known as ethnology (a term coined and defined by Adam František Kollár|Adam F. Kollár in 1783). Han F. Vermeulen, "The German Invention of  Ethnological Discourse in Europe and Asia, 1740-1798." In: Sara Eigen and Mark Larrimore, eds. "The German Invention of Race." 2006. The study of kinship and social organization is a central focus of cultural anthropology, as kinship is a human universal. Cultural anthropology also covers economic and political organization, law and conflict resolution, patterns of consumption and exchange, material culture, technology,  gender relations, ethnicity, childrearing and socialization, religion, myth, symbols, values, etiquette, worldview, sports, music, nutrition, recreation, games, food, festivals, and language (which is also the object of study in linguistic anthropology). ===Physical  Biological Anthropology and Physical Anthropology are synonymous terms to describe  research focused on the study of humans and non-human primates in their biological, evolutionary, and demographic dimensions. It examines the biological and social factors that have affected the evolution of humans and other primates, and that generate, maintain or change contemporary genetic and physiological variation. University of Toronto. (n.d.). "Research Subfields: Physical or Biological". Retrieved March 14, 2012, from    Archaeology is the study of human history and its artifacts. Archaeologists typically look at the material remains of human groups in order to find out how people lived. Pieces of pottery, tools, and other artifacts that are left behind give clues about the social and cultural lives of past societies Robbins, R. H. & Larkin, S. N. (2007). Cultural Anthropology: A problem based approach. Toronto, ON: Nelson Education Ltd. ===Linguistic  Linguistic anthropology (also called  linguistics) seeks to understand the processes of human  verbal and non-verbal, variation in language across time and space, the social uses of language, and the relationship between language and culture. It is the branch of anthropology that brings linguistic methods to bear on  problems, linking the analysis of linguistic forms and processes to the interpretation of sociocultural processes. Linguistic  often draw on related fields including  pragmatics, cognitive linguistics, semiotics, discourse analysis, and narrative analysis. Salzmann, Zdeněk. (1993) "Language, culture, and society: an introduction to linguistic anthropology". Boulder, CO: Westview Press.  between subfields=== Because anthropology developed from so many different enterprises (see History of Anthropology), including but not limited to Fossil   documentary film-making, paleontology, primatology, antiquity dealings and curatorship, philology, etymology, genetics, regional analysis, ethnology, history, philosophy, and religious studies, Erickson, Paul A. and Liam D. Murphy. "A History of  Theory". Broadview Press. 2003. p. 11-12 George Stocking, "Paradigmatic Traditions in the History of Anthropology." In George Stocking, The Ethnographer's Magic and Other Essays in the History of Anthropology (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992):342-361. it is difficult to characterize the entire field in a brief article, although attempts to write histories of the entire field have been made. Leaf, Murray. "Man, Mind and Science: A History of Anthropology." Columbia University Press. 1979 Because of the holistic nature of  research, all branches of anthropology have widespread practical application in diverse fields. This is known as applied anthropology. Thus military expeditions employ  to discern strategic cultural footholds; marketing professionals employ anthropology to determine propitious placement of advertising; and humanitarian agencies depend on  insights as means to fight poverty. Examples of applied anthropology are ubiquitous. Focused in a positive light, Anthropology is one of the few places where humanities, social, and natural sciences are forced to confront one another. As such, anthropology has been central in the development of several new (late 20th century)  fields such as cognitive science, global studies, and various ethnic studies. ==Basic trends== There are several  that tend to unite  work. One of the central  is that anthropology tends to provide a comparatively more  account of phenomena and tends to be highly empirical. Hylland Eriksen, Thomas. (2004) "What is Anthropology" Pluto. London. p. 79. The quest for holism leads most  to study a particular place, problem or phenomenon in detail, using a variety of methods, over a more extensive period than normal in many parts of academia. In the 1990s and 2000s (decade), calls for clarification of what constitutes a culture, of how an observer knows where his or her own culture ends and another begins, and other crucial topics in writing anthropology were heard. It is possible to view all human cultures as part of one large, evolving global culture. These dynamic relationships, between what can be observed on the ground, as opposed to what can be observed by compiling many local observations remain fundamental in any kind of anthropology, whether cultural, biological, linguistic or  Rosaldo, Renato. "Culture and Truth: The remaking of social analysis". Beacon Press. 1993; Inda, John Xavier and Renato Rosaldo. "The Anthropology of Globalization.  2007" Biological  are interested in both human variation Robert Jurmaiine, Lynn Kiilgore, Wenda Treavathan, and Russell L. Ciochon. "Introduction to Physical Anthropology. 11th Edition. Wadsworth. 2007, chapters I, III and IV."; Wompack, Mari. "Being Human". Prentice Hall. 2001, pp. 11-20. and in the possibility of human universals (behaviors, ideas or concepts shared by virtually all human cultures) Brown, Donald. "Human Universals". McGraw Hill. 1991; Roughley, Neil. "Being Humans:  Universality and Particularity in Transciplinary Perspectives". Walter de Gruyter Publishing. 2000 They use many different methods of study, but modern population genetics, participant observation and other techniques often take  "into the field," which means traveling to a community in its own setting, to do something called "fieldwork." On the biological or physical side, human measurements, genetic samples, nutritional data may be gathered and published as articles or monographs. At the same time,  urge, as part of their quest for scientific objectivity, cultural relativism, which has an influence on all the sub-fields of anthropology. This is the notion that particular cultures should not be judged by one culture's values or viewpoints, but that all cultures should be viewed as relative to each other. There should be no notions, in good anthropology, of one culture being better or worse than another culture. Levi-Strauss, Claude. "The Savage Mind". 1962; Womack, Mari. "Being Human." 2001 Ethical commitments in anthropology include noticing and documenting genocide, infanticide, racism, mutilation including circumcision and subincision, and torture. Topics like racism, slavery or human sacrifice, therefore, attract  attention and theories ranging from nutritional deficiencies Harris, Marvin. "Cows, Pigs, Wars and Witches". to genes   to acculturation have been proposed, not to mention theories of colonialism and many others as root causes of Man's inhumanity to man. To illustrate the depth of an  approach, one can take just one of these topics, such as "racism" and find thousands of  references, stretching across all the major and minor sub-fields.  AAAnet.org]   Shanklin, Eugenia. 1994. Anthropology & Race; Faye V. Harrison. 1995. "The Persistent Power of 'Race' in the Cultural and Political Economy of Racism." Annual Review of Anthropology. 24:47-74. Allan Goodman. 1995. "The Problematics of "Race" in Contemporary Biological Anthropology." In Biological Anthropology: The State of the Science.; Yearbook of Physical Anthropology, 1945-. "Melanin,   see Stanford's recent collection of overarching bibliographies on race and racism,   Along with dividing up their project by theoretical emphasis,  typically divide the world up into relevant time periods and geographic regions. Human time on Earth is divided up into relevant cultural traditions based on material, such as the Paleolithic and the Neolithic, of particular use in archaeology. Further cultural subd
Agricultural science	Agricultural science is a broad  field that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture. (veterinary  science, but not animal science, is often excluded from the definition.) ==Agriculture and agricultural science== The two terms are often confused. However, they cover different concepts: *Agriculture is the set of activities that transform the environment for the production of animals and plants for human use. Agriculture concerns techniques, including the application of agronomic research. *Agronomy is research and development related to studying and improving plant-based agriculture. Agricultural sciences include research and development on: * Production techniques (e.g., irrigation management, recommended nitrogen inputs) * Improving agricultural productivity in terms of quantity and quality (e.g., selection of  crops and animals, development of new pesticides, yield-sensing technologies, simulation models of crop growth, in-vitro cell culture techniques) * Transformation of primary products into end-consumer products (e.g., production, preservation, and packaging of dairy products) * Prevention and correction of adverse ==Agricultural science: a local science== With the exception of theoretical production  agronomy, research in agronomy, more than in any other field, is strongly related to local areas. It can be considered a science of ecoregions, because it is closely linked to soil properties and climate, which are never exactly the same from one place to another. Many people think an agricultural production system relying on local weather, soil  and specific crops has to be studied locally. Others feel a need to know and understand production systems in as many areas as possible, and the human dimension of interaction with nature. ==History of agricultural science== Agricultural science began with Gregor Mendel's genetic work, but in modern terms might be better dated from the chemical fertilizer outputs of plant  physiological understanding in eighteenth century Germany. In the United States, a scientific revolution in agriculture began with the Hatch Act of 1887|Hatch Act of 1887, which used the term "agricultural science". The Hatch Act was driven by farmers' interest in knowing the constituents of early artificial fertilizer. The Smith-Hughes Act of 1917 shifted agricultural education back to its vocational roots, but the scientific foundation had been built. Hillison J. (1996).  The Origins of Agriscience: Or Where Did All That Scientific Agriculture Come From?]. "Journal of Agricultural Education". After 1906, public expenditures on agricultural research in the US exceeded private expenditures for the next 44 years.  Huffman WE, Evenson RE. (2006).  Science for Agriculture]". Blackwell Publishing.  of agriculture since the 1960s in developed and developing countries, often referred to as the Green Revolution, was closely tied to progress made in selecting and improving crops and animals for high productivity, as well as to developing additional inputs such as artificial fertilizers and  products. As the oldest and largest human intervention in nature, the environmental impact of agriculture in general and more recently intensive agriculture, industrial development, and population growth have raised many questions among agricultural scientists and have led to the development and emergence of new fields. These include technological fields that assume the solution to technological problems lies in better technology, such as integrated pest management, waste  treatment technologies, landscape architecture, genomics, and agricultural philosophy fields that include references to food industry|food production as something essentially different from non-essential economic 'goods'. In fact, the interaction between these two approaches provide a fertile field for deeper understanding in agricultural science. New technologies, such as biotechnology and computer science (for data processing and storage), and technological advances have made it possible to develop new research fields, including genetic engineering, agrophysics, improved  analysis, and precision farming. Balancing these, as above, are the natural and human sciences of agricultural science that seek to understand the human-nature interactions of history of  agriculture, including interaction of Religion and  and agriculture, and the non-material components of agricultural production systems. ===Prominent agricultural scientists=== * Justus von Liebig * Jethro Tull  Tull * Robert Bakewell  Bakewell * Norman Borlaug * Luther Burbank * George Washington Carver * René Dumont * Jay Lush * Gregor Mendel * Kailas Nath Kaul * Louis Pasteur * Eli Whitney, Jr.|Eli Whitney * Sewall Wright * Scott Hill ==Agricultural science and agriculture crisis== Agriculture sciences seek to feed the world's population while preventing biosafety problems that may affect human health and the environment  This requires promoting good management of natural resources and respect for the environment, and increasingly concern for the psychological wellbeing of all concerned in the food production and consumption system. Economic, environmental, and social aspects of agriculture sciences are subjects of ongoing debate. Recent crises (such as avian influenza, Bovine Spongiform  cow disease and issues such as the use of genetically modified organisms) illustrate the complexity and importance of this debate. ==Fields or related disciplines== * Agricultural  * Agricultural economics * Agricultural engineering * Agricultural geography * Agricultural philosophy * Agricultural marketing * Agrophysics * Animal science ** Animal breeding ** Animal nutrition * Agronomy ** Plant science ** Theoretical production ecology ** Horticulture ** Plant breeding **  fertilization * Aquaculture * Biological engineering ** Genetic engineering ** Microbiology * Environmental science * Food science ** Human nutrition * Irrigation and water management * Soil science ** Agrology * Waste management ==See also== * Agriculture ministry *Agricultural sciences basic topics *Agroecology *American Society of Agronomy *Genomics of domestication *List of agriculture topics *History of agricultural science *Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences *International Assessment of Agricultural Science and Technology for Development *International Food Policy Research Institute, IFPRI *Research Institute of Crop Production (RICP) (in the Czech Republic) *University of Agricultural Sciences *National FFA Organization ==Further reading==  Agricultural Research, Livelihoods, and Poverty: Studies of Economic and Social Impacts in Six Countries] Edited by Michelle Adato and Ruth Meinzen-Dick (2007), Johns Hopkins University Press Food Policy Report   Agricultural research, livelihoods, and poverty | International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) <!-- Bot generated title  ] *Claude Bourguignon, "Regenerating the Soil: From Agronomy to Agrology", Other India Press, 2005 *Pimentel David, Pimentel Marcia, "Computer les kilocalories", Cérès, n. 59, sept-oct. 1977 *Russell E. Walter, "Soil conditions and plant growth", Longman group, London, New York 1973 *Salamini Francesco, Oezkan Hakan, Brandolini Andrea, Schaefer-Pregl Ralf, Martin William, "Genetics and geography of wild cereal domestication in the Near East", in Nature, vol. 3, ju. 2002 *Saltini Antonio, "Storia delle scienze agrarie", 4 vols, Bologna 1984-89, ISBN 88-206-2412-5, ISBN 88-206-2413-3, ISBN 88-206-2414-1, ISBN 88-206-2414-X *Vavilov Nicolai I. (Starr Chester K. editor), "The Origin, Variation, Immunity and Breeding of Cultivated Plants. Selected Writings", in Chronica botanica, 13: 1-6, Waltham, Mass., 1949–50 *Vavilov Nicolai I., "World Resources of Cereals, Leguminous Seed Crops and Flax," Academy of Sciences of Urss, National Science Foundation, Washington, Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem 1960 *Winogradsky Serge, "Microbiologie du sol. Problèmes et methodes. Cinquante ans de recherches," Masson & c.ie, Paris 1949 ==References== ==External links== *  Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)] *  Agricultural Research Service] *  Indian Council of Agricultural Research] *  International Institute of Tropical Agriculture] *  International Livestock Research Institute] *  The National Agricultural Library (NAL)] - The most comprehensive agricultural library in the world. *  Crop Science Society of America] *  American Society of Agronomy] *  Soil Science Society of America] *  Agricultural Science Researchers, Jobs and Discussions]  Information System for Agriculture and Food Research]  South Dakota Agricultural Laboratories]    науки da:Agronomi  es:Agronomía fa:علم کشاورزی fr:Agronomie   it:Agronomia   ja:農学 pl:Agronomia pt:Ciências agrárias     
Alchemy	File:Alchemy of  sa'ādat ("The Alchemy of Happiness") &ndash; a text on Islamic philosophy and spiritual alchemy by  (1058–1111). Alchemy is an influential philosophical tradition whose early practitioners' claims to profound powers were known from antiquity. The defining objectives of alchemy are varied; these include the creation of the fabled philosopher's stone possessing powers including the capability of turning base metals into the noble metals gold or silver, as well as an elixir of life conferring youth and immortality. Western alchemy is recognized as a protoscience that contributed to the development of modern chemistry and medicine. Alchemists developed a framework of theory, terminology, experimental process and basic laboratory techniques that are still recognizable today. But alchemy differs from modern science in the inclusion of  principles and practices related to mythology, religion, and spirituality. ==Overview== The defining goals of alchemy are often given as the  of common metals into gold (known as chrysopoeia), the creation of a panacea  and the discovery of a  solvent.  Alchemy at  However, this only highlights certain aspects of alchemy. List of  have historically rewritten, and evolved the explanation of their art, making a singular definition difficult. H.J. Sheppard gives the following as a comprehensive summary: }} Modern discussions of alchemy are generally split into an examination of its exoteric practical applications, and its esoteric aspects. The former is pursued by historians of the physical sciences who have examined the subject in terms of  medicine, and charlatanism. The latter is of interest to the historians of esotericism, psychologists, spiritual and new age communities, and hermetic philosophers. For a detailed look into the problems of defining alchemy see The subject has also made an ongoing impact on literature and the arts. Despite the modern split, numerous sources stress an integration of esoteric and exoteric approaches to alchemy. Holmyard, when writing on exoteric aspects, states that they can not be properly appreciated if the esoteric is not always kept in mind. The prototype for this model can be found in Bolos of Mendes' second century BCE work, "Physika kai Mystika (On Physical and Mystical Matters)". name="Antoine Faivre 1995.  Marie-Louise von Franz tells us the double approach of Western alchemy was set from the start, when Greek philosophy was mixed with Egyptian and Mesopotamian technology. The technological, operative approach, which she calls extraverted, and the mystic, contemplative, psychological one, which she calls introverted are not mutually exclusive, but complementary instead, as meditation requires practice in the real world, and conversely.  }} ===Relation to the science of chemistry=== Practical applications of alchemy produced a wide range of contributions to medicine and the physical sciences. Alchemists Jābir ibn Hayyān N.C. Datta. "The Story of Chemistry." p.23 and Robert Boyle Arthur Greenburg. "From alchemy to chemistry in picture and story." are both credited as being the fathers of chemistry. Paracelsian iatrochemistry emphasized the medicinal application of alchemy (continued in plant alchemy, or spagyric). H. Stanley Redgrove. "Alchemy Ancient and Modern" p.60 Studies of alchemy also influenced Isaac Newton|Isaac Newton's theory of gravity. Mitch Stokes. "Isaac Newton" p. 57 Academic historical research supports that the alchemists were searching for a material substance using physical methods. It is a popular belief that alchemists made contributions to the "chemical" industries of the day—ore testing and refining, metalworking, production of gunpowder, ink, dyes, paints, cosmetics,  tanning, ceramics, glass manufacture, preparation of extracts, liquors, and so on (it seems that the preparation of "aqua vitae", the "water of life", was a fairly popular "experiment" among European alchemists). Alchemists contributed distillation to Western Europe. The attempts of alchemists to arrange information on substances, so as to clarify and anticipate the products of their chemical reactions, resulted in early conceptions of chemical elements and the first rudimentary periodic tables. They learned how to extract metals from ores, and how to compose many types of inorganic acids and bases. During the 17th century, practical alchemy started to evolve into modern chemistry, name="William R Newman 1998 pp.  William R Newman & Lawrence M Principe (1998) "The Etymological Origins of an  Mistake" in "Early Science and Medicine", Vol. 3, No. 1 pp. 32–65 as it was renamed by Robert Boyle, the "father of modern chemistry". name="Deem, Rich  In his book, "The Skeptical Chymist", Boyle attacked Paracelsus and the natural philosophy of Aristotle, which was taught at universities. However, Boyle's biographers, in their emphasis that he laid the foundations of modern chemistry, neglect how steadily he clung to the  sciences and to alchemy, in theory, practice and doctrine. name="More  The decline of alchemy continued in the 18th century with the birth of modern chemistry, which provided a more precise and reliable framework within a new view of the universe based on rational materialism. ===Relation to Hermeticism=== In the eyes of a variety of esoteric and  practitioners, the heart of alchemy is spiritual. Transmutation of lead into gold is presented as an analogy for personal transmutation, purification, and perfection. name="Antoine Faivre 1995.  Antoine Faivre, Wouter J. Hanegraaff. "Western esotericism and the science of religion." 1995. p.96 This approach is often termed 'spiritual', 'esoteric', or 'internal' alchemy. Early alchemists, such as Zosimos of Panopolis (c. AD 300), highlight the spiritual nature of the alchemical quest, symbolic of a religious regeneration of the human soul. Allen G. Debus. "Alchemy and early modern chemistry." The Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry. p.34. This approach continued in the Middle Ages, as metaphysical aspects, substances, physical states, and material processes were used as metaphors for  entities, spiritual states, and, ultimately,  In this sense, the literal meanings of 'Alchemical Formulas' were a blind, hiding their true spiritual philosophy. Practitioners and patrons such as Melchior Cibinensis and Pope Innocent VIII existed within the ranks of the church, while Martin Luther applauded alchemy for its consistency with Christian teachings. Raphael Patai. "The Jewish Alchemists: A History and Source Book." Princeton University Press. p.4 Both the transmutation of common metals into gold and the universal panacea symbolized evolution from an imperfect, diseased, corruptible, and ephemeral state towards a perfect, healthy, incorruptible, and everlasting state; and the philosopher's stone then represented a mystic key that would make this evolution possible. Applied to the alchemist himself, the twin goal symbolized his evolution from ignorance to enlightenment, and the stone represented a hidden spiritual truth or power that would lead to that goal. In texts that are written according to this view, the cryptic alchemical symbols, diagrams, and textual imagery of late alchemical works typically contain multiple layers of meanings, allegories, and references to other equally cryptic works; and must be laboriously decoded to discover their true meaning. In his 1766 "Alchemical Catechism", Théodore Henri de Tschudi denotes that the usage of the metals was a symbol: During the renaissance, alchemy broke into more distinct schools placing spiritual alchemists in high contrast with those working with literal metals and chemicals. name="Raphael Patai  Raphael Patai. "The Jewish Alchemists: A History and Source Book." Princeton University Press. p.3 While most spiritual alchemists also incorporate elements of exotericism, examples of a purely spiritual alchemy can be traced back as far as the sixteenth century, when Jacob Boehme used alchemical terminology in strictly mystical writings. Daniel Merkur. "Gnosis: an esoteric tradition of mystical visions and unions." State University of New York Press. p.75 Another example can be found in the work of Heinrich Khunrath (1560–1605) who viewed the process of transmutation as occurring within the alchemist's soul. name="Raphael Patai  The recent work of L. M. Principe and William R. Newman, seeks to reject the 'spiritual  of alchemy, stating it arose as a product of the Victorian occult revival.  There is evidence to support that some classical alchemical sources were adulterated during this time to give greater weight to the spiritual aspects of alchemy.   "Newton and Newtonianism" by James E. Force, Sarah Hutton, p211 name="Principe 2001  Despite this, other scholars such as Calian and Tilton reject this view as entirely historically inaccurate, drawing examples of historical spiritual alchemy from Boehme, Isaac Newton, and Michael Maier. }} ==Etymology== The word alchemy may derive from the Old French "alquimie", which is from the Medieval Latin "alchimia", and which is in turn from the Arabic "al-kimia"  This term itself is derived from the Ancient Greek "chemeia" (χημεία) or "chemia" (χημία)  alchemy], Oxford Dictionaries with the addition of the Arabic definite article "al-" (الـ).  Or see . The ancient Greek word may have been derived from See, for example, the etymology for χημεία in a version of the Egyptian  name for Egypt, which was itself based on the Ancient Egyptian word "kēme" (hieroglyphic Khmi, "black earth", as opposed to desert sand).  The word could also have originally derived from the Greek "chumeia" (χυμεία) meaning "mixture" and referring to pharmaceutical chemistry. See, for example, both the etymology given in the Oxford English Dictionary and also that for χυμεία in With the later rise of alchemy in Alexandria, the word may have derived from Χημία, and thus became spelled as χημεία, and the original meaning forgotten. The original source for this analysis is the article on pp. 81&ndash;85 of Its etymology is still open to question. ==History==  and symbol key from a 17th century book on alchemy. The symbols used have a one-to-one correspondence with symbols used in astrology at the time. Alchemy covers several philosophical traditions spanning some four millennia and three continents. These traditions' general penchant for cryptic and symbolic language makes it hard to trace their mutual influences and "genetic" relationships. One can distinguish at least three major strands, which appear to be largely independent, at least in their earlier stages: Chinese alchemy, centered in China and its zone of cultural influence;  alchemy, centered around the Indian subcontinent; and Western alchemy, which occurred around the Mediterranean  and whose center has shifted over the millennia from Egypt (Roman  Egypt, to the Muslim world|Islamic world, and finally Middle Ages|medieval Europe. Chinese alchemy was closely connected to Taoism and Indian alchemy with the Indian  faiths, whereas Western alchemy developed its own philosophical system that was largely independent of, but influenced by, various Western religions. It is still an open question whether these three strands share a common origin, or to what extent they influenced each other. ===Alchemy in Greco-Roman Egypt===  Ambix, cucurbit and retort of Zosimos, from Marcelin Berthelot, "Collection des anciens alchimistes grecs" (3 vol., Paris, 1887–1888). The origin of Western alchemy may generally be traced to Hellenistic Egypt. The Hellenistic  city of Alexandria was a center of Greek alchemical knowledge, and retained its preeminence through most of the Greek and Roman periods. "New Scientist", December 24–31, 1987 Here, elements of technology, religion, mythology, and Greeks|Greek philosophy, each with their own much longer histories, combined to form the earliest known records 
Alien	Alien or Aliens may refer to: * Alien (law), a non-citizen inhabitant of a country *  life, defined as life that does not originate from Earth * List of alleged  beings (ufology) * Any introduced species, a species living outside its native distributional range == Fiction == === Film === * Alien (film)|"Alien" (film), a 1979 film directed by Ridley Scott ** Aliens  (film), a 1986 sequel directed by James Cameron ** Alien 3, a 1992 sequel directed by David Fincher ** Alien Resurrection, a 1997 fourth film and third sequel directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet ** Alien (creature in Alien franchise), the titular creatures of the franchise, also called the Xenomorph ** Alien  (franchise), the science fiction horror film franchise * "The Alien", an incomplete 1967 Satyajit Ray film * "Monsters vs. Aliens", 2009  3-D science fiction action comedy film === Other fictional works === * Aliens (1902  (1902 novel), by Mary Tappan Wright * Aliens (novel  (novel series), based on the "Alien" franchise characters * Aliens (comic book)|"Aliens" (comic book), series based on the "Alien" franchise characters *  in fiction * List of Alien and Predator games, based on the "Alien" and "Predator" franchises == Music == * Alien  (album), by Strapping Young Lad * Alien (band), Swedish rock band * The Aliens, Scottish rock band * The Aliens (Australian band), a 1970s new wave band from Australia * Alien (song)|"Alien" (song) by Pennywise * Alien (Third Day song)|"Alien" (Third Day song) * "Alien", song by Nerina Pallot from the album "Dear Frustrated Superstar" * "Alien", song by Tokio Hotel from the album "Humanoid  * "Alien", song by Pennywise from the album "Straight Ahead (Pennywise  Ahead" * "Alien", song by Erasure from the album "Loveboat" * "Alien", song by Lamb from the album "Fear of Fours" * "Alien", song by Bush from the album "Sixteen Stone" * "Alien", song by Thriving Ivory from Thriving Ivory (album)|their self-titled debut album * "Aliens Exist", song by Blink 182 from the album "Enema of the State" == Technology == * Alien (software), a computer program * Alien Technology, manufacturer of RFID technology * AliEn (ALICE Environment), lightweight Grid framework developed by CERN * Alienware, a division of Dell == Other == * "Aliens", the newsletter of the Invasive Species Specialist Group of the International Union for Conservation of Nature * Alien (ship owner), company in Saint Petersburg, Russia * Alien (signifier), term used in literature and criticism * Alien Sun (born 1974), Singapore-born actress and Miss Singapore of 1994 * "Alien", a line of perfumes by Thierry  Mugler == See also == * * * Alians (band), Polish rock band * "ATLiens", 1996 album by OutKast cs:Alien de:Alien es:Alien fr:Alien  id:Alien it:Alien (disambigua)  nl:Alien  pl:Alien ru:Чужой simple:Alien fi:Alien   tr:Alien
Astronomer	 Astronomer (Vermeer)|The Astronomer" by Johannes Vermeer (c. 1668) An astronomer is a scientist who studies Celestial body|celestial bodies such as planets, stars and  Historically, astronomy was more concerned with the classification and description of phenomena in the sky, while astrophysics attempted to explain these phenomena and the differences between them using physical laws. Today, that distinction has mostly disappeared and the terms "astronomer" and  are  Professional astronomers are highly educated individuals who typically have a PhD in physics or astronomy and are employed by research institutions or  They spend the majority of their time working on research, although they quite often have other duties such as teaching, building instruments, or aiding in the operation of an observatory. The number of professional astronomers in the United States is actually quite small. The American Astronomical Society, which is the major organization of professional astronomers in North America, has approximately 7,700 members. This number includes scientists from other fields such as physics, geology, and engineering, whose research interests are closely related to astronomy. The International Astronomical Union comprises almost 10,145 members from 70 different countries who are involved in astronomical research at the PhD level and beyond. While the number of professional astronomers worldwide is not much larger than the population of a small town, there is a huge community of amateur astronomers. Most cities have amateur astronomy clubs that meet on a regular basis and often host star parties in their communities. The Astronomical Society of the Pacific is the largest general astronomical society in the world, comprising both professional and amateur astronomers as well as educators from 70 different nations. Like any hobby, most people who think of themselves as amateur astronomers may devote a few hours a month to stargazing and reading the latest developments in research. However, amateurs span the range from so-called "armchair astronomers" to the very ambitious, who own science-grade telescopes and instruments with which they are able to make their own discoveries and assist professional astronomers in research. ==Modern astronomers==  is often referred to as the Father of Modern Astronomy. Contrary to the classical image of an old astronomer peering through a telescope through the dark hours of the night, it is very rare for a modern professional astronomer to use an eyepiece on a larger telescope. It is far more common to use a charge-coupled device camera to record a long, deep exposure, allowing a more sensitive image to be created because the light is added over time. Before CCDs, photographic plates were a common method of observation. Modern astronomers spend relatively little time at telescopes - most spend a few weeks per year observing, and the rest of their time reducing the data (changing it from raw data to processed images) and analyzing it. Many astronomers work entirely from Astronomical  survey or space observatory data. Others work with radio telescopes like the Very Large Array, which is entirely automated, although it is maintained by telescope operators. Some astronomers do not work with data at all, but instead use computational simulations or analytical models to provide analysis of observed phenomena or make predictions for observational astronomers. Astronomers who serve as faculty spend much of their time teaching undergraduate and graduate classes. Most universities also have outreach programs including public telescope time and sometimes planetariums as a public service and to encourage interest in the field. ==See also== *List of astronomers *List of Muslim astronomers *Cosmologists *List of Russian astronomers and  ==Notes== ==References== * * * ==External links== *  American Astronomical Society] *  International Astronomical Union] *  Astronomical Society of the Pacific]    occupations als:Astronom ar:عالم فلك ast:Astrónomu az:Astronom     bs:Astronom ca:Astrònom cs:Astronom da:Astronom de:Astronom es:Astrónomo eo:Astronomo  fr:Astronome   gl:Astrónomo  hr:Astronom id:Astronom it:Astronomo  la:Astronomus lb:Astronom lt:Astronomas  ms:Ahli astronomi nl:Astronoom  no:Astronom nn:Astronom uz:Astronom nds:Astronom pl:Astronom pt:Astrônomo kaa:Astronom ro:Astronom  scn:Astrònumu   sk:Astronóm sl:Astronom   sv:Astronom  tr:Astronom   vi:Nhà thiên văn học  
Amoeboid	Image:live Ammonia  ("Ammonia tepida") Amoeboids are  life-forms characterized by an irregular shape. "Amoeboid" and " amœba " are often used  even by biologists, and especially refer to a creature moving by using pseudopodia. Most references to "amoebas" or "amoebae" are to amoeboids in general rather than to the specific genus "Amoeba". The genus "Amoeba" and amoeboids in general both derive their names from the ancient Greek word for change. ==Structure== Amoeboids Amoeboid movement|move using pseudopodia, which are bulges of cytoplasm. Amoebas breathe using their entire cell membrane that is constantly immersed in water. Excess water can cross into the cytosol. Amoebas have a contractile vacuole to expel excess water. Food sources vary in amoeboids. They may consume bacteria or other protists. Some are detritivores and eat dead organic material. They extend a pair of pseudopodia around food. They fuse to make a food vacuole which then fuses with a lysosome to add digestive chemicals. Undigested food is expelled at the cell membrane. Amoebas use pseudopodia to move and feed. They are powered by flexible microfilaments near the membrane. Microfilaments are at least 50% of the cytoskeleton. The other parts are more stiff and are composed of intermediate filaments and microtubules. These are not used in amoeboid movement, but are stiff skeletons on which organelles are supported or can move on. The shells of amoebas are often composed of calcium. The proteins or materials are synthesised in the cell and exported just outside the cell membrane.  amoebas: Slime molds=== Amoebas seem to have connections with two phyla (now defunct) composed of multicellular organisms of the lineage of fungus-like protists, the so-called slime molds. These two defunct phyla were the Myxomycota (i.e., plasmodial slime molds, now classified in the taxon Myxogastria), and Acrasiomycota (i.e. cellular slime molds, now divided into the taxa Acrasida and  These two phyla use amoeboid movement in their feeding stage. The former is basically a giant multinucleate amoeba, while the latter lives solitary until food runs out; in which a colony of these functions as a unit. Myxomycete slime molds use amoeboid gametes, as well. ==Diversity== They have appeared in a number of different groups. Some cells in multicellular animals may be amoeboid, for instance human white blood cells, which consume pathogens. Many protists also exist as individual amoeboid cells, or take such a form at some point in their life-cycle. The most famous such organism is "Amoeba|Amoeba proteus"; the name amoeba is variously used to describe its close relatives, other organisms similar to it, or the amoeboids in general.  As amoebas themselves are polyphyletic and subject to some imprecision in definition, the term "amoeboid" does not provide identification of an organism, and is better understood as description of locomotion. When used in the broader sense, the term can include many different groups. One source includes 97 different genera. name="urlThe  Others include far fewer. ===Older  In older classification systems, amoeboids, under the taxon name Sarcodina , had been divided into several  categories based on the form and structure of their pseudopods. Amoeboids with pseudopods supported by regular arrays of microtubules were called actinopods , whereas those that weren't were called rhizopods , which were further subdivided into lobose, filose, and reticulose amoebae. In contrast to "rhizopods", where most of their morphologies can be mapped to modern classification systems, "actinopods" appear to be extensively polyphyletic. Actinopods are divided into radiolaria and heliozoa (itself a polyphyletic grouping). Finally, there was also a strange group of giant marine amoeboids, the  that did not fall into any of these categories. ===Modern  More modern  are based upon cladistics. It has been stated that most amoeboid are now grouped in Amoebozoa or Rhizaria.  However, in contexts where "amoeboid" is defined more loosely, there are many amoeboid species that are in the Excavata clade. Phylogenetic analyses place these genera into the following groups (not all of these are considered amoeboid (or "amoebas") by all sources): {|  |- ! Grouping ! Genera ! Morphology |-  | Amoebozoa | * Lobosea : ** "Acanthamoeba, Amoeba  Balamuthia, Chaos  Clydonella, Discamoeba, Echinamoeba, Filamoeba, Flabellula, Gephyramoeba, Glaeseria, Hartmannella, Hydramoeba, Korotnevella  Leptomyxa, Lingulamoeba, Mastigina, Mayorella, Metachaos, Neoparamoeba, Paramoeba, Polychaos, Phreatamoeba, Platyamoeba,  Rhizamoeba, Saccamoeba, Sappinia, Stereomyxa, Thecamoeba, Trichamoeba,  Unda, Vannella, Vexillifera" *Conosa: "Endamoeba", "Entamoeba", "Hyperamoeba,"  "Mastigella", "Pelomyxa" | valign=top| * Lobose pseudopods (Lobosea): Lobose pseudopods are blunt, and there may be one or several on a cell, which is usually divided into a layer of clear ectoplasm surrounding more granular endoplasm. |-  | Rhizaria | valign=top| * Cercozoa: ** Filosa : *** Monadofilosa : "Gyromitus", "Paulinella" *** Granofilosea : ** Endomyxa :  "Vampyrella" ***Gromiidea  * Foraminifera * Radiolaria | valign=top| * Filose pseudopods (Filosa): Filose pseudopods are narrow and tapering. The vast majority of filose amoebae, including all those that produce shells, are placed within the Cercozoa together with various flagellates that tend to have amoeboid forms. The naked filose amoebae also includes vampyrellids. * Reticulose pseudopods (Endomyxa): Reticulose pseudopods are cytoplasmic strands that branch and merge to form a net. They are found most notably among the Foraminifera, a large group of marine protists that generally produce  shells. There are only a few sorts of naked reticulose amoeboids, notably the gymnophryids, and their relationships are not certain. * Radiolarians are a subgroup of actinopods that are now grouped with rhizarians. |-  |  | valign=top| * Heterolobosea :   "Naegleria,     Sawyeria, Tetramitus, Vahlkampfia, Willaertia"  "Gruberella", "Stachyamoeba"  "Dientamoeba", "Histomonas" *Other: "Rosculus", "Acrasis", " Heteramoeba", "Learamoeba", "Stygamoeba",   "Tulamoeba"   | valign=top| * The Heterolobosea, includes protists that can transform between amoeboid and flagellate forms. |-  | Chromalveolate | Heterokont: "Hyalodiscus", "Labyrinthula"   "Pfiesteria" | * "Hyalodiscus" and "Pfiesteria" are sometimes considered to have amoeboid  |-  | Nucleariid |  Nuclearia" | * Nucleariids appear to be close relatives of animals and fungus|fungi. |- | Ungrouped/  unknown | "Adelphamoeba, Astramoeba, Cashia, Dinamoeba,  Flamella, Gibbodiscus, Gocevia, Hollandella, Iodamoeba, Malamoeba, Nollandia, Oscillosignum, Paragocevia, Parvamoeba, Pernina, Pontifex    Rugipes, Striamoeba, Striolatus, Subulamoeba, Theratromyxa, Trienamoeba,  Vampyrellium" | |} ==Pathogenic interactions with other organisms== Some amoeboids can infect other organisms pathogenically (causing disease): *"Entamoeba histolytica" is the cause of amoebiasis, or "amoebic dysentery". *"Naegleria fowleri" (the "brain-eating amoeba") is a  species that can be fatal to humans if introduced through the nose.  can cause amoebic keratitis and encephalitis in humans. *"Balamuthia mandrillaris" is the cause of (often fatal) granulomatous amoebic  ==References== ==External links== *  The Amoebae] website brings together information from published sources. *  Amoebas are more than just blobs] *  Sun Animacules and Amoebas]  Molecular Expressions Digital Video Gallery: Pond Life - Amoeba (Protozoa)] Some good, informative Amoeba videos. *  Amoebae: Protists Which Move and Feed Using Pseudopodia] at the Tree of Life web project  Category:Cell biology   cells  الحركة     de:Amöbe et:Juurjalgsed es:Rizópodo eu:Rhizopoda fr:Rhizopoda  id:Rhizopoda it:Sarcodina  lt:Ameboidai  ja:肉質虫  ro:Sarcodine  sv:Amöbadjur  vi:Amip
ASCII	Image:ASCII Code  128 ASCII characters including non-printable  128 ASCII characters, including non-printable characters (represented by their  <br  The 95 ASCII graphic characters are numbered from 20    to 7E    (decimal 32 to 126). The space character is considered a non-printing graphic.   "RFC 20: ASCII format for Network Interchange"], ANSI X3.4-1968, October 16, 1969.   The American Standard Code for Information Interchange ( ASCII , ;  Audio pronunciation for ASCII]. "Merriam Webster". Accessed 2008-04-14. ) is a character  scheme originally based on the English alphabet. ASCII codes represent character  in computers,  equipment, and other devices that use text. Most modern  schemes are based on ASCII, though they support many additional characters. ASCII developed from Telegraph  codes. Its first commercial use was as a seven-bit teleprinter code promoted by Bell data services. Work on the ASCII standard began on October 6, 1960, with the first meeting of the American Standards Association's (ASA) X3.2 subcommittee. The first edition of the standard was published during 1963,  Mary Brandel (July 6, 1999).  1963: The Debut of ASCII]: "CNN". Accessed 2008-04-14. American Standard Code for Information Interchange, ASA X3.4-1963, American Standards Association, June 17, 1963 a major revision during 1967, USA Standard Code for Information Interchange, USAS X3.4-1967, United States of America Standards Institute, July 7, 1967 and the most recent update during 1986. American National Standard for Information Systems — Coded Character Sets — 7-Bit American National Standard Code for Information Interchange (7-Bit ASCII), ANSI X3.4-1986, American National Standards Institute, Inc., March 26, 1986 Compared to earlier telegraph codes, the proposed Bell code and ASCII were both ordered for more convenient sorting (i.e.,  of lists and added features for devices other than teleprinters. ASCII includes definitions for 128 characters: 33 are non-printing control characters (many now obsolete)  that affect how text and space is processed International Organization for  (December 1, 1975).  The set of control characters for ISO 646]". "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority Registry". Alternate U.S. version:  Accessed 2008-04-14. and 95 printable characters, including the space  (which is considered an invisible graphic    ). The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority|IANA prefers the name US-ASCII name="IANA"  to avoid ambiguity. ASCII was the most commonly used character encoding on the World Wide Web until December 2007, when it was surpassed by UTF-8. ==History== Image:ASCII Code Chart-Quick ref  US ASCII 1968 Code Chart was structured with two columns of control characters, a column with special characters, a column with numbers, and four columns of letters The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) was developed under the auspices of a committee of the American Standards Association, called the X3 committee, by its X3.2 (later X3L2) subcommittee, and later by that subcommittee's X3.2.4 working group. The ASA became the United States of America Standards Institute or USASI Mackenzie, p.211. and ultimately the American National Standards Institute. The X3.2 subcommittee designed ASCII based on earlier teleprinter encoding systems. Like other character encodings, ASCII specifies a correspondence between digital bit patterns and character  symbols (i.e. graphemes and control characters). This allows digital devices to communicate with each other and to process, store, and communicate  information such as written language. Before ASCII was developed, the encodings in use included 26 English  characters, 10 numerical digits, and from 11 to 25 special graphic symbols. To include all these, and control characters compatible with the CCITT|Comité Consultatif International Téléphonique et  standard, Fieldata, and early EBCDIC, more than 64 codes were required for ASCII. The committee debated the possibility of a shift key function (like the Baudot code), which would allow more than 64 codes to be represented by six bits. In a shifted code, some character codes determine choices between options for the following character codes. It allows compact encoding, but is less reliable for data transmission; an error in transmitting the shift code typically makes a long part of the transmission unreadable. The standards committee decided against shifting, and so ASCII required at least a seven-bit code. Decision 4. Mackenzie, p.215. The committee considered an eight-bit code, since eight bits (octet  would allow two four-bit patterns to efficiently encode two digits with binary coded decimal. However, it would require all data transmission to send eight bits when seven could suffice. The committee voted to use a seven-bit code to minimize costs associated with data transmission. Since perforated tape at the time could record eight bits in one position, it also allowed for a parity bit for error checking if desired. Decision 5. Mackenzie, p.217. Eight-bit machines (with octets as the native data type) that did not use parity checking typically set the eighth bit to 0. Sawyer A. Sawyer and Steven George Krantz (January 1, 1995). "A Tex Primer for Scientists". CRC Press. ISBN 0-8493-7159-7. p.13. The code itself was patterned so that most control codes were together, and all graphic codes were together, for ease of  The first two columns (32 positions) were reserved for control characters. Decision 8,9. Mackenzie, p.220. The Space  character had to come before graphics to make sorting  easier, so it became position 20    ; Decision 10. Mackenzie, p.237. for the same reason, many special signs commonly used as separators were placed before digits. The committee decided it was important to support upper case sixbit code  alphabets, and chose to pattern ASCII so it could be reduced easily to a usable 64-character set of graphic codes. Decision 14. Mackenzie, p.228. Lower case letters were therefore not interleaved with upper case. To keep options available for lower case letters and other graphics, the special and numeric codes were arranged before the letters, and the letter "A" was placed in position 41    to match the draft of the corresponding British standard. Decision 18. Mackenzie, p.238. The digits 0–9 were arranged so they correspond to values in binary prefixed with 011, making conversion with binary-coded decimal  Many of the  characters were positioned to correspond to their shifted position on typewriters. Thus #, $ and % were placed to correspond to 3, 4, and 5 in the adjacent column. The parentheses could not correspond to 9 and 0, however, because the place corresponding to 0 was taken by the space character. Since many European typewriters placed the parentheses with 8 and 9, those corresponding positions were chosen for the parentheses. The @ symbol was not used in continental Europe and the committee expected it would be replaced by an accented À in the French variation, so the @ was placed in position 40    next to the letter A. Mackenzie, p.243. The control codes felt essential for data transmission were the start of message (SOM), end of address (EOA), End of Message|end of message (EOM), end of transmission (EOT), "who are you?" (WRU), "are you?" (RU), a reserved device control (DC0), synchronous idle (SYNC), and acknowledge (ACK). These were positioned to maximize the Hamming distance between their bit patterns. Mackenzie, p.243-245. With the other special characters and control codes filled in, ASCII was published as ASA X3.4-1963, leaving 28 code positions without any assigned meaning, reserved for future  and one unassigned control code. Mackenzie, p.66, 245. There was some debate at the time whether there should be more control characters rather than the lower case alphabet. Mackenzie, p.435. The indecision did not last long: during May 1963 the CCITT Working Party on the New Telegraph Alphabet proposed to assign lower case characters to columns 6 and 7, Brief Report: Meeting of CCITT Working Party on the New Telegraph Alphabet, May 13–15, 1963. and International Organization for  TC 97 SC 2 voted during October to incorporate the change into its draft standard. Report of ISO/TC/97/SC 2 – Meeting of October 29–31, 1963. The X3.2.4 task group voted its approval for the change to ASCII at its May 1963 meeting. Report on Task Group X3.2.4, June 11, 1963, Pentagon Building, Washington, DC. Locating the lowercase letters in columns 6 and 7 caused the characters to differ in bit pattern from the upper case by a single bit, which simplified  character matching and the construction of keyboards and printers. The X3 committee made other changes, including other new characters (the bracket|brace and vertical line characters), Report of Meeting No. 8, Task Group X3.2.4, December 17 and 18, 1963 renaming some control characters (SOM became start of header (SOH)) and moving or removing others (RU was removed). Mackenzie, p.247–248. ASCII was subsequently updated as USASI X3.4-1967, then USASI X3.4-1968, ANSI X3.4-1977, and finally, ANSI X3.4-1986 (the first two are occasionally retronamed ANSI X3.4-1967, and ANSI X3.4-1968). The X3 committee also addressed how ASCII should be transmitted (least significant bit first), and how it should be recorded on perforated tape. They proposed a 9-track standard for magnetic tape, and attempted to deal with some forms of punched card formats. ASCII itself was first used commercially during 1963 as a seven-bit teleprinter code for American Telephone & Telegraph's TWX  eXchange) network. TWX originally used the earlier five-bit Baudot code, which was also used by the competing Telex teleprinter system. Bob Bemer introduced features such as the Escape  sequence.  His British colleague Hugh McGregor Ross helped to popularize this  to Bemer, "so much so that the code that was to become ASCII was first called the Bemer-Ross Code in Europe". Bob Bemer (n.d.).  Bemer meets Europe].  Accessed 2008-04-14. Employed at IBM at that time Because of his extensive work on ASCII, Bemer has been called "the father of ASCII."  <!-- "The endorsement of the Federal government, then the largest purchaser of computer equipment, was probably the single most important reason for the subsequent wide adoption of ASCII." – Martha M. Gray  /* ?? */  On March 11, 1968, U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson mandated that all computers purchased by the United States federal government support ASCII, stating:  I have also approved  of the Secretary of Commerce regarding standards for recording the Standard Code for Information Interchange on magnetic tapes and paper tapes when they are used in computer operations. All computers and related equipment configurations brought into the Federal Government inventory on and after July 1, 1969, must have the capability to use the Standard Code for Information Interchange and the formats prescribed by the magnetic tape and paper tape standards when these media are used. Lyndon B. Johnson (March 11, 1968).  Memorandum Approving the Adoption by the Federal Government of a Standard Code for Information Interchange]. "The American Presidency Project". Accessed 2008-04-14.  Other international standards bodies have ratified character encodings such as ISO/IEC 646 that are identical or nearly identical to ASCII, with extensions for characters outside the English alphabet and symbols used outside the United States, such as the symbol for the United Kingdom's pound sterling (£). Almost every country needed an adapted version of ASCII, since ASCII suited the needs of only the USA and a few other countries. For example, Canada had its own version that supported French characters. Other adapted encodings include ISCII (India), VISCII (Vietnam), and YUSCII (Yugoslavia). Although these encodings are sometimes referred to as ASCII, true ASCII is defined strictly only by ANSI standard. ASCII was incorporated into the Unicode
Austin (disambiguation)	Austin is the capital of the U.S. state of Texas. Austin may also refer to: ==Geographical locations== ===In the United States=== *Austin, Arkansas *Austin, Colorado *Austin, Chicago, Illinois *Austin, Indiana *Austin, Minnesota *Austin, Nevada *Austin, Oregon *Austin County, Texas (note that Austin, Texas, is located in Travis County, Texas) ===In Canada=== *Austin, Manitoba *Austin, Ontario *Austin, Quebec *Austin Island, Nunavut ===In Australia=== *Austin, Western Australia  *Austin Station  various places *Austin (CTA Blue Line), on the Chicago Transit Authority's Blue Line *Austin (CTA Green Line), on the CTA's Green Line ==People== Austin is a given name and surname, an English language Contraction  of Augustine (given  It may refer to: ===Surname=== *Albert Austin (1881–1953),  actor *Alfred Austin (1835–1913), British poet *Bernard L. Austin (1902-1979), American admiral *Brett Austin (1959–1990), New Zealand swimmer *Bunny Austin (1906–2000), British tennis player *Charlie Austin (born 1989), English footballer *Charles Austin (born 1967), American athlete *Chase Austin (born 1989), American NASCAR racecar driver *Dallas Austin (born 1970), American musician *Denise Austin (born 1957), American fitness expert *Ennis Raymond Austin, American architect *Gene Austin (1900–1972), American singer *Henry Austin (architect) (1804–1891), American architect *Henry Austin (baseball) (1844–1904), American baseball player *Herbert Austin (1866–1941), British founder of the Austin Motor Company *Hubert Austin (1845–1915), British architect *Jake T. Austin (born 1994), American actor *John Austin (legal philosopher) (1790–1859), English jurist *John Arnold Austin (1905–1941), American sailor *J. L. Austin (1911–1960), British philosopher *Johntá Austin (born 1980), American  *Kate Austin (1864–1902), American writer, feminist and anarchist *Kent Austin (born 1963), American football player and coach *Lloyd Austin (born 1953), American general *Mary Hunter Austin (1868–1934), American writer *Ned Austin (1925–2007), American actor *Phil Austin (born 1941), American comedian and writer *Sarah Austin (Internet personality) American Internet personality *Sarah Austin (translator) (1793–1867), English author *Sherrié Austin (born 1970), Australian musician *Stephen F. Austin (1793–1836), American politician, founder of Texas *Stone Cold Steve Austin (born 1964), American wrestler and actor *Tex Austin (1886–1938), American rodeo promoter *Tracy Austin (born 1962), American tennis player *Woody Austin (born 1964), American golfer ===Given name=== *Austin Butler (born 1991), American actor *Austin Clarke (born 1934), Canadian writer *Austin Collie (born 1985), Canadian-born American football player *Austin Healey (born 1973), English rugby union player *Austin Idol, the ring name of American professional wrestler Dennis McCord (born 1949) *Austin Mitchell, UK Member of Parliament. *Austin Nichols (born 1980), American actor *Austin Osman Spare (1886–1956), English artist and magician *Austin Stevens (born 1950), South African photographer ===Fiction=== *Steve Austin (fictional  Austin, fictional character in Martin Caidin's novel "Cyborg", which inspired the television series "The Six Million Dollar Man" *Austin Moon  Moon, fictional character in Austin & Ally, portrayed by Ross Lynch *Austin Powers  Powers, fictional character in films, created and portrayed by Mike Myers ==Colleges== *Austin College, Sherman, Texas *University of Texas at Austin, flagship institution of the University of Texas System *Austin Peay State University, Clarksville, Tennessee ==Religion== *Austin is a contracted form of  of Hippo *As an adjective Austin refers to the  Order ==Business== *Austin Automobile Company, short-lived American automobile company (not related to the Austin Motor Company or American Austin) *Austin (brand), a brand owned by the Kellogg Company *Austin Motor Company, British car manufacturer *American Austin Car Company, short lived American automobile maker ==Vessels== *USS Austin (1839), a sloop-of-war (originally in the Texas Navy) *USS Austin (DE-15), a destroyer escort *USS Austin (LPD-4), an amphibious transport dock ==Pop culture== *Austin (song), a single by Blake Shelton *Austin TV, a Mexican post-rock band *Austin, a kangaroo Beanie Baby produced by Ty, Inc. *Austin the kangaroo from The Backyardigans ==See also== *Austen   pages beginning with Austin  surnames  toponyms bg:Остин ca:Austin  cs:Austin (rozcestník) da:Austin de:Austin es:Austin  fa:آستین  fr:Austin ko:오스틴 io:Austin it:Austin (disambigua)   la:Austin nl:Austin   no:Austin (andre betydninger) pl:Austin  pt:Austin  ro:Austin ru:Остин sk:Austin sl:Austin (razločitev) fi:Austin  sv:Austin tr:Austin uk:Остін vo:Austin zh:柯士甸
Animation	<div class="thumb  <div  style="width:   <div  The bouncing ball animation (below) consists of these six frames.   <div  This animation moves at 10 frames per second.    Animation is the rapid display of a sequence of images to create an illusion of movement. The most common method of presenting animation is as a motion picture or video program, although there are other methods. == Etymology == From Latin "animātiō", "the act of bringing to life"; from "animō" ("to animate" or "give life to") + "-ātiō" ("the act of"). == Early examples == File:Vase  images sequence from a vase found in Iran  Egyptian burial chamber mural, approximately 4000 years old, showing wrestlers in action. Even though this may appear similar to a series of animation drawings, there was no way of viewing the images in motion. It does, however, indicate the artist's intention of depicting motion. Early examples of attempts to capture the phenomenon of motion drawing can be found in paleolithic cave paintings, where animals are depicted with multiple legs in superimposed positions, clearly attempting to convey the perception of motion. A 5,000 year old earthen bowl found in Iran in Shahr-e  Sokhta has five images of a goat painted along the sides. This has been claimed to be an example of early animation. However, since no equipment existed to show the images in motion, such a series of images cannot be called animation in a true sense of the word. A Chinese zoetrope-type device had been invented in 180 AD. The  praxinoscope, and the common flip book were early popular animation devices invented during the 19th century. These devices produced the appearance of movement from sequential drawings using technological means, but animation did not really develop much further until the advent of  There is no single person who can be considered the "creator" of film animation, as there were several people working on projects which could be considered animation at about the same time. Georges Méliès was a creator of special-effect films; he was generally one of the first people to use animation with his technique. He discovered a technique by accident which was to stop the camera rolling to change something in the scene, and then continue rolling the film. This idea was later known as stop-motion animation. Méliès discovered this technique accidentally when his camera broke down while shooting a bus driving by. When he had fixed the camera, a hearse happened to be passing by just as Méliès restarted rolling the film, his end result was that he had managed to make a bus transform into a hearse. This was just one of the great contributors to animation in the early years. The earliest surviving stop-motion advertising film was an English short by Arthur  called "Matches: An Appeal" (1899). Developed for the Bryant and May Matchsticks company, it involved stop-motion animation of wired-together matches writing a patriotic call to action on a blackboard. J. Stuart Blackton was possibly the first American film-maker to use the techniques of stop-motion and hand-drawn animation. Introduced to film-making by Thomas Edison|Edison, he pioneered these concepts at the turn of the 20th century, with his first copyrighted work dated 1900. Several of his films, among them "The Enchanted Drawing" (1900) and "Humorous Phases of Funny Faces" (1906) were film versions of Blackton's "lightning artist" routine, and utilized modified versions of Méliès' early stop-motion techniques to make a series of blackboard drawings appear to move and reshape themselves. 'Humorous Phases of Funny Faces' is regularly cited as the first true animated film, and Blackton is considered the first true animator.   (1908  by Emile Cohl, 1908 Another French artist, Émile Cohl, began drawing cartoon strips and created a film in 1908 called "Fantasmagorie (1908  The film largely consisted of a stick figure moving about and encountering all manner of morphing objects, such as a wine bottle that transforms into a flower. There were also sections of live action where the animator’s hands would enter the scene. The film was created by drawing each frame on paper and then shooting each frame onto negative film, which gave the picture a blackboard look. This makes  the first animated film created using what came to be known as traditional  (hand-drawn) animation. Following the successes of Blackton and Cohl, many other artists began experimenting with animation. One such artist was Winsor McCay, a successful newspaper cartoonist, who created detailed animations that required a team of artists and painstaking attention for detail. Each frame was drawn on paper; which invariably required backgrounds and characters to be redrawn and animated. Among McCay's most noted films are "Little Nemo" (1911), "Gertie the Dinosaur" (1914) and "The Sinking of the Lusitania" (1918). The production of animated short films, typically referred to as "cartoons", became an industry of its own during the 1910s, and cartoon shorts were produced to be shown in movie theaters. The most successful early animation producer was John Randolph Bray, who, along with animator Earl Hurd, patented the cel animation process which dominated the animation industry for the rest of the decade. "El Apóstol" (Spanish: "The Apostle") was a 1917 Argentine animated film utilizing cutout animation, and the world's first animated feature film. == Techniques == === Traditional animation ===  example of traditional animation, a horse animated by rotoscoping from Eadweard Muybridge's 19th century photos Traditional animation (also called cel animation or hand-drawn animation) was the process used for most animated films of the 20th century. The individual frames of a traditionally animated film are photographs of drawings, which are first drawn on paper. To create the illusion of movement, each drawing differs slightly from the one before it. The animators' drawings are traced or photocopied onto transparent acetate sheets called cels, which are filled in with paints in assigned colors or tones on the side opposite the line drawings. The completed character cels are photographed one-by-one onto motion picture film against a painted background by a rostrum camera. The traditional cel animation process became obsolete by the beginning of the 21st century. Today, animators' drawings and the backgrounds are either scanned into or drawn directly into a computer system. Various software programs are used to color the drawings and simulate camera movement and effects. The final animated piece is output to one of several delivery media, including traditional 35 mm film and newer media such as digital video. The "look" of traditional cel animation is still preserved, and the character animators' work has remained essentially the same over the past 70 years. Some animation producers have used the term "tradigital" to describe cel animation which makes extensive use of computer technology. Examples of traditionally animated feature films include "Pinocchio (1940  (United States, 1940), "Animal Farm (1954 film)|Animal Farm" (United Kingdom, 1954), and "Akira (film)|Akira" (Japan, 1988). Traditional animated films which were produced with the aid of computer technology include "The Lion King" (US, 1994) "Spirited Away|Sen to Chihiro no Kamikakushi (Spirited Away)" (Japan, 2001), and "Les Triplettes de Belleville" (France, 2003). * Full animation refers to the process of producing high-quality traditionally animated films, which regularly use detailed drawings and plausible movement. Fully animated films can be done in a variety of styles, from more realistically animated works such as those produced by the Walt Disney Animation Studios|Walt Disney studio ("Beauty and the Beast (1991 film)|Beauty and the Beast", "Aladdin (1992 Disney  "The Lion King|Lion King") to the more 'cartoony' styles of those produced by the Warner Bros.  Bros. animation studio. Many of the Disney animated features are examples of full animation, as are non-Disney works such as "The Secret of NIMH" (US, 1982), "The Iron Giant" (US, 1999), and "Nocturna  (Spain, 2007). * Limited animation involves the use of less detailed and/or more stylized drawings and methods of movement. Pioneered by the artists at the American studio United Productions of America, limited animation can be used as a method of stylized artistic expression, as in "Gerald McBoing Boing" (US, 1951), "Yellow Submarine (1968 film)|Yellow Submarine" (UK, 1968), and much of the anime produced in Japan. Its primary use, however, has been in producing cost-effective animated content for media such as television (the work of Hanna-Barbera, Filmation, and other TV animation studios) and later the Internet (web cartoons). * Rotoscoping is a technique, patented by Max Fleischer in 1917, where animators trace live-action movement, frame (film)|frame by frame. The source film can be directly copied from actors' outlines into animated drawings, as in "The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)|The Lord of the Rings" (US, 1978), or used in a stylized and expressive manner, as in "Waking Life" (US, 2001) and "A Scanner Darkly (film)|A Scanner Darkly" (US, 2006). Some other examples are: Fire and Ice (1983 film)|"Fire and Ice" (USA, 1983) and Heavy Metal (film)|"Heavy Metal" (1981). * Films with live action and  is a technique, when combining hand-drawn characters into live action shots. One of the earlier uses of it was Koko the Clown when Koko was drawn over live action footage. Other examples would include "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" (USA, 1988), "Space Jam" (USA, 1996) and "Osmosis Jones" (USA, 2002). === Stop motion === File:Moving  stop-motion animation of a moving coin Stop-motion animation is used to describe animation created by physically manipulating real-world objects and photographing them one frame of film at a time to create the illusion of movement. There are many different types of stop-motion animation, usually named after the medium used to create the animation. Computer software is widely available to create this type of animation. * Puppet animation typically involves stop-motion puppet figures interacting with each other in a constructed environment, in contrast to the real-world interaction in model animation. The puppets generally have an armature  inside of them to keep them still and steady as well as constraining them to move at particular joints. Examples include "The Tale of the Fox" (France, 1937), "The Nightmare Before Christmas" (US, 1993), "Corpse Bride" (US, 2005), "Coraline  (US, 2009), the films of Jiří Trnka and the TV series "Robot Chicken" (US,  ** Puppetoon , created using techniques developed by George Pal, are  films which typically use a different version of a puppet for different frames, rather than simply manipulating one existing puppet.  animation * Clay animation , or Plasticine animation often abbreviated as "claymation", uses figures made of clay or a similar malleable material to create stop-motion animation. The figures may have an armature  or wire frame inside of them, similar to the related puppet animation (below), that can be manipulated to pose the figures. Alternatively, the figures may be made entirely of clay, such as in the films of Bruce Bickford  Bickford, where clay creatures morph into a variety of different shapes. Examples of clay-animated works include "Gumby|The Gumby Show" (US, 1957–1967) "Morph  shorts (UK, 1977–2000), "Wallace and Gromit" shorts (UK, as of 1989), Jan Švankmajer's "Dimensions of Dialogue"  1982), "The Trap Door" (UK, 1984). Films include "Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit", "Chicken Run" and "The Adventures of Mark Twain (1985 film)|The Adventures of Mark Twain". * Cutout animation is a type of stop-motion animation produced by moving 2-dimensional pieces of material such as paper or cloth. Examples include Terry Gilliam's animated sequences from "Monty Python's Flying Circus" (UK, 19
Apollo	<!-- this article uses the BCE/CE convention  Apollo (Attic Greek|Attic, Ionic Greek|Ionic, and Homeric Greek: , "Apollōn" (gen.: ); Doric Greek|Doric: , "Apellōn"; Arcadocypriot  , "Apeilōn"; Aeolic Greek|Aeolic: , "Aploun"; ) is one of the most important and complex of the Twelve  deities in Ancient Greek  Greek and Ancient Roman religion|Roman religion, Greek  and Roman mythology, and Hellenic  Roma|Roman Neopaganism. The ideal of the "kouros" (a beardless, athletic youth), Apollo has been variously recognized as a god of light and the sun, truth and prophecy, healing, plague, music, poetry, and more. Apollo is the son of Zeus and Leto, and has a twin sister, the chaste huntress Artemis. Apollo is known in  Etruscan mythology as "Apulu". As the patron of Delphi ("Pythian Apollo"), Apollo was an oracular god—the prophetic deity of the Pythia|Delphic Oracle. Medicine and healing are associated with Apollo, whether through the god himself or mediated through his son Asclepius, yet Apollo was also seen as a god who could bring ill-health and deadly Plague  Amongst the god's custodial charges, Apollo became associated with dominion over Colonies in  and as the patron defender of herds and flocks. As the leader of the Muses ("Apollon Musegetes") and director of their choir, Apollo functioned as the patron god of music and poetry. Hermes created the lyre for him, and the instrument became a common  and  of Apollo. Hymns sung to Apollo were called paeans. In Hellenistic times, especially during the 3rd century BCE, as "Apollo Helios" he became identified among Greeks with Helios, Titan  solar deity|god of the sun, and his sister Artemis similarly equated with Selene, Titan lunar deity|goddess of the moon. For the iconography of the  type, see H. Hoffmann, 1963. "Helios", in "Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt" 2 , pp. 117–23; cf. Yalouris 1980, no. 42. In Latin texts, on the other hand, Joseph Fontenrose declared himself unable to find any conflation of Apollo with Sol  among the Classical Latin|Augustan poets of the 1st century, not even in the conjurations of Aeneas and Latinus in "Aeneid" XII (161–215). Joseph Fontenrose, "Apollo and Sol in the Latin poets of the first century BC", "Transactions of the American Philological Association" 30 (1939), pp 439–55; "Apollo and the Sun-God in Ovid", "American Journal of Philology" 61 (1940) pp 429–44; and "Apollo and Sol in the Oaths of Aeneas and Latinus" "Classical Philology" 38 .2 (April 1943), pp. 137–138. Apollo and Helios/Sol remained separate beings in literary and mythological texts until the 3rd century CE. ==Etymology== Image:AGMA Apollon  of the "Apollo Lykeios" type, Ancient Agora of Athens|Museum of the Ancient Agora of Athens (inv. BI 236). The etymology of "Apollo" is uncertain. The spelling  had almost superseded all other forms by the beginning of the common era, but the Doric form Απέλλων is more archaic, derived from an earlier  The name is certainly cognate with the Doric month name  and the Doric festival   Van torn et al (Editors), "Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible", 1996, BRILL, pp. 73 - 76:  google books preview] Several instances of popular etymology are attested from ancient authors. Thus, the Greeks most often associated Apollo's name with the Greek verb  ("apollymi"), "to destroy".  Behind the Name: Meaning, Origin and History of the Name Apollo] Plato in "Cratylus" connects the name with ("apolysis"), "redeem", with ("apolousis"),  and with ("aploun"), "simple", The suggestion is repeated by Plutarch in "Moralia" in the sense of "1  in particular in reference to the Thessalian form of the name, , and finally with ("aeiballon"),  Hesychius of  connects the name Apollo with the Doric απέλλα ("apella"), which means "assembly", so that Apollo would be the god of political life, and he also gives the explanation σηκός ("sekos"), "fold", in which case Apollo would be the god of flocks and herds. Following the tradition of these Ancient Greek folk etymologies, in the Doric dialect the word originally meant wall, fence from animals and later assembly within the "agora". In the Ancient Macedonian language (pella) means stone, and some toponyms are derived from this word: (Pella:capital of Macedonia (ancient  Macedonia),  A number of non-Greek etymologies have been suggested for the name, Martin Nilsson, "Die Geschichte der Griechische Religion", vol. I (C.H. Beck) 1955:555-564. The form "Apaliunas" ("  d  ") is attested as a god of Wilusa The reading of "Apaliunas" and the possible identification with Apollo is due to Emil Forrer (1931). It was doubted by Kretschmer, Glotta XXIV p.250.Martin Nilsson (1967) Vol I p.559 in a treaty between Alaksandu of Wilusa and the  great king Muwatalli II "ca" 1280 BCE. "Alaksandu" could be Paris  of Troy|Ilion", Latacz, Joachim, "Troia und Homer: Der Weg zur Lösung eines alten Rätsels." (Munich) 2001:138. whose name is Greek.  Henry George Lidell, Robert Scott:"A Greek English Lexicon" The Hittite  testimony reflects an early form ', which may also be surmised from comparison of Cypriot Απειλων with Doric  Hans G. Güterbock, "Troy in Hittite Texts?" in: Mellink (ed.), "Troy and the Trojan War: a symposium held at Bryn Mawr College, October 1984", Bryn Mawr Archaeological Monographs. Authors John Lawrence Angel, Machteld Johanna Mellink, 1986, ISBN  p. 42. A Luwian  etymology suggested for "Apaliunas" makes Apollo "The One of Entrapment", perhaps in the sense of "Hunter". Edwin L. Brown, 'In Search of Anatolian Apollo' in: Chapin (ed.), "Charis: essays in honor of Sara A. Immerwahr", Supplement to volume 33 of "Hesperia", ASCSA, 2004, ISBN  p. 254. Among the proposed etymologies is the Hurrian and Hittite divinity, "Aplu", who was widely invoked during the "plague years". Aplu, it is suggested, comes from the Akkadian "Aplu Enlil", meaning "the son of Enlil", a title that was given to the god Nergal, who was linked to Shamash, Babylonian god of the sun.  de Grummond, Nancy Thomson (2006) "Etruscan Myth, Sacred History, and Legend". (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology); Mackenzie, Donald A. (2005) "Myths of Babylonia and Assyria" (Gutenberg) ===Greco-Roman epithets=== Apollo, like other Greek deities, had a number of epithets applied to him, reflecting the variety of roles, duties, and aspects ascribed to the god. However, while Apollo has a great number of appellations in Greek myth, only a few occur in Latin literature, chief among them Phoebus ( ; Φοίβος, "Phoibos", literally "radiant"), which was very commonly used by both the Greeks and Romans in Apollo's role as the god of light. As sun-god and god of light, Apollo was also known by the epithets Aegletes ( ;  "Aiglētēs", from αἴγλη, "light of the sun"), Apollonius of Rhodes, iv. 1730;"   i. 9. § 26 Helius ( ; Ἥλιος, "Helios", literally "sun"),  Phanaeus ( ;  "Phanaios", literally "giving or bringing light"), and Apollo Lyceus|Lyceus ( ;  "Lukeios", from Proto-Greek  *λύκη, "light"). The meaning of the epithet "Lyceus" later became associated Apollo's mother Leto, who was the patron goddes of Lycia (Λυκία) and who was identified with the wolf (λύκος), Aelian, "On the Nature of Animals" 4. 4 (A.F. Scholfield, tr.). earning him the epithets Lycegenes ( ;  "Lukēgenēs", literally "born of a wolf" or "born of Lycia") and Lycoctonus ( ;  "Lukoktonos", from λύκος, "wolf", and  "to kill"). As god of the sun, the Romans referred to Apollo as Sol  ( ; literally "sun" in Latin). In association with his birthplace, Cynthus|Mount Cynthus on the island of Delos, Apollo was called Cynthius ( ;  "Kunthios", literally "Cynthian"), Cynthogenes ( ;   literally "born of Cynthus"), and Delius ( ; Δήλιος, "Delios", literally "Delian"). As Artemis's twin, Apollo had the epithet Didymaeus ( ;  "Didumaios", from  "twin"). File:Bassai Temple Of Apollo  view of the temple of Apollo Epikurios (healer) at Bassae in southern Greece. Apollo was worshipped as Actiacus ( ;  "Aktiakos", literally "Actian"), Delphinius ( ;  "Delphinios", literally "Delphic"), and Pythius ( ; Πύθιος, "Puthios", from Πυθώ, "Pūthō", the area around Delphi), after Actium  and Delphi (Δελφοί) respectively, two of his principal places of worship. Ovid,  xiii. 715 Strabo, x. p. 451 An etiology in the Homeric hymns associated the epithet "Delphinius" with dolphins. He was worshipped as Acraephius ( ;  "Akraiphios", literally "Acraephian") or Acraephiaeus ( ;   literally "Acraephian") in the Boeotian town of Acraephia  reputedly founded by his son Acraepheus; and as   ( ;  "Smintheus",  is, "of the town of Sminthos or Sminthe") Entry   in LSJ near the Troad town of Hamaxitus. The epithet "Smintheus" has historically been confused with  "mouse", in association with Apollo's role as a god of disease. For this he was also known as Parnopius ( ;  "Parnopios", from πάρνοψ, "locust") and to the Romans as Culicarius ( ; from Latin "culicārius", "of midges").  Temple of the Delians at Delos, dedicated to Apollo (478 BC). 19th-century pen-and-wash restoration.  of Apollo Smintheus at Çanakkale, Turkey. In Apollo's role as a healer, his appellations included Acesius ( ;  "Akesios", from ἄκεσις, "healing"), Acestor ( ;  "Akestōr", literally "healer"), Paean (god)|Paean ( ; Παιάν, "Paiān", from παίειν, "to touch"), and Iatrus ( ; Ἰατρός, "Iātros", literally "physician"). Euripides, "Andromache  901 Acesius was the epithet of Apollo worshipped in Elis, where he had a temple in the agora.  "Acesius". "Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology". London, 1880. The Romans referred to Apollo as Medicus ( ; literally "physician" in Latin) in this respect. A Roman temple|temple was dedicated to "Apollo Medicus" at Rome, probably next to the temple of Bellona  As a protector and founder, Apollo had the epithets Alexicacus ( ;  "Alexikakos", literally "warding off evil"), Apotropaeus ( ;  "Apotropaios", from  "to avert"), and Epicurius ( ;  "Epikourios", from  "to aid"),  and Archegetes ( ;   literally "founder"), Clarius ( ;  "Klārios", from Doric Greek|Doric κλάρος, "allotted lot"), and Genetor ( ;  "Genetōr", literally "ancestor").  To the Romans, he was known in this capacity as Averruncus ( ; from Latin  "to avert"). He was also called Agyieus ( ;  "Aguīeus", from ἄγυια, "street") for his role in protecting roads and homes; and as Nomius ( ; Νόμιος, "Nomios", literally "pastoral") and Nymphegetes ( ;   from Νύμφη, "Nymph", and ἡγέτης, "leader") in his role as a protector of shepherds and pastoral life. In his role as god of prophecy and truth, Apollo had the epithets Manticus ( ;  "Mantikos", literally "prophetic"), Leschenorius ( ;   from  "converser"), and Loxias ( ; Λοξίας, "Loxias", from λέγειν, "to say").  The epithet "Loxias" has historically been associated with λοξός, "ambiguous". In this respect, the Romans called him Coelispex ( ; from Latin "coelum", "sky", and "specere", "to look at"). The epithet Iatromantis ( ;   from ὶατρός, "physician", and μάντις, "prophet") refers to both his role as a god of healing and of prophecy. As god of music and arts, Apollo had the epithet Musagetes ( ; Doric Greek|Doric   LSJ entry   or Musegetes ( ;   from Μούσα, "Muse", and ἡγέτης, "leader"). As a god of archery, Apollo was known as Aphetor ( ; Ἀφήτωρ, "Aphētōr", from ὰφίημι, "to let loose") or Aphetorus ( ;  "Aphētoros", of the same origin), Argyrotoxus ( ;  "Argurotoxos", literally "with silver bow"), Hecaërgus ( ;  "Hekaergos", literally  and Hecebolus ( ;  "Hekēbolos", literally  The Romans referred to Apollo as Articenens ( ;  Apollo was called Ismenius ( ;  "Ismēnios", literally "of Ismenus") after Ismenus, the son of Amphion and Niobe, whom he struck with a
Andre Agassi	}} Andre Kirk Agassi (; born April 29, 1970) is a retired American  professional tennis player and former List of ATP number 1 ranked players|world no. 1.  Generally considered by critics and fellow players to be one of the greatest tennis players of all time,     "Stars pay tribute to Agassi"]. BBC. Retrieved May 15, 2010. Agassi has been called the best service returner in the history of the game.   "Reed's shotmakers: Men's return of serve"]. Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved May 15, 2010.  "Adjectives Tangled in the Net"]. "The New York Times". Retrieved May 15, 2010.  "Sampras, Agassi Have Just Begun to Fight"] "Los Angeles Times". Retrieved May 15, 2010. Described by the BBC upon his retirement as "perhaps the biggest worldwide star in the sport's history",  Agassi's performances, along with his unorthodox apparel and attitude, have seen him cited as one of the most charismatic players in the history of the game, and credited for helping revive the popularity of tennis during the 1990s.   In singles tennis, Agassi is an eight-time Grand Slam (tennis)|Grand Slam champion who competed in 15 Grand Slam finals, a Tennis at the 1996 Summer Olympics|1996 Olympic gold medalist, and the winner of the 1990 ATP Tour World Championships. He is one of four male singles players to have achieved a Grand Slam  Grand Slam|Career Grand Slam (all four Grand Slam championships) in the History of  Era and one of seven in history, the first of two to have achieved a Career Golden Slam (Career Grand Slam and Olympic gold medal), and the only man to have won the Career Golden Slam and the ATP Tour World Championships: a distinction dubbed as a "Career Super Slam" by "Sports Illustrated".  Agassi was the first male player to win all four Grand Slams on three different surfaces (hard, clay and grass), and the last American male to win the French Open (1999) and the Australian Open (2003). He also won 17 ATP World Tour Masters 1000|ATP Masters Series titles, and was part of a winning Davis Cup team in 1990 Davis Cup|1990 and 1992 Davis Cup|1992.  After suffering from sciatica caused by two bulging discs in his back, a   displacement) and a bone spur that interfered with the nerve, Agassi retired from professional tennis on September 3, 2006, after losing in the third round of the US Open (tennis)|US Open. He is the founder of the Andre Agassi Charitable Foundation, which has raised over $60 million for at-risk children in Southern Nevada. In 2001, the Foundation opened the Andre Agassi College Preparatory Academy in Las Vegas, a K-12 public charter school for at-risk children. ==1970–1985: Early life== Agassi was born in Las Vegas, Nevada, to Emmanuel  "Mike" Aghassian and Elizabeth "Betty" Agassi (née Dudley).  His father, a former Olympic boxer for Iran, is of Armenian and Assyrian descent and changed the family name to Agassi after his migration to the United States.    Andre Agassi's mother, Betty, is a breast cancer survivor. He has three older siblings – Rita, Philip and Tami. Mike Agassi reportedly banged on the fences with a hammer during Andre's matches when his son lost a point, screamed at officials and was ejected more than once. In a passage from the book "Open", Agassi details how his father made him play a match for money with football legend Jim Brown, in 1979, when Agassi was just 9 years old. Brown was at a Vegas tennis club complaining to the owner about a money match that was canceled. Agassi's father stepped in and told Brown that he could play his son and he would put up his house for the wager. Brown countered with a $10,000 bet; but after being warned by the club owner not to take the bet because he would lose and be embarrassed, Brown and Mike Agassi agreed that they'd set the amount after he and Andre played two sets. Brown lost those sets, 3–6, 3–6, declined the 10K wager, and offered to play the third for $500, which he lost 2–6.  At age 13, Andre was sent to Nick Bollettieri's Tennis Academy in Florida.  He was meant to stay for only 3 months because that was all his father could afford. After thirty minutes of watching Agassi play, Bollettieri called Mike and said: "Take your cheque back. He's here for free", claiming that Agassi had more natural talent than anyone else he had seen.  Agassi dropped out of school in the ninth grade.  tennis career biography==  He turned professional at the age of 16 and competed in his first tournament at La Quinta, California. He won his first match against John Austin (tennis)|John Austin 6–4, 6–2, but then lost his second match to Mats Wilander 1–6, 1–6. By the end of the year, Agassi was ranked world no. 91.  Agassi won his first top-level singles title in 1987 at the ATP Itaparica|Sul American Open in Itaparica.   He ended the year ranked world no. 25.   He won six additional tournaments in 1988 (Memphis, 1988 U.S. Men's Clay Court  Men's Clay Court Championships, World Championship Tennis#WCT 1988|Forest Hills WCT, Stuttgart Outdoor, 1988 Volvo  International and 1988 Livingston  Open),   and, by December of that year, he had surpassed US$1 million in career prize money after playing in just 43  fastest anyone in history had reached that level.  Andre Agassi – Biography <!-- Bot generated title  ] During the year, he set the open-era record for most consecutive victories by a male teenager, a record that would stand for 17 years until being broken by Rafael Nadal in 2005. His year-end ranking was world no. 3, behind second-ranked Ivan Lendl and top-ranked Mats Wilander. Both the Association of Tennis Professionals and "Tennis" magazine named Agassi the Most Improved Player of the Year for 1988.   In addition to not playing the Australian Open (which would later become his best Grand Slam event) for the first eight years of his career, Agassi chose not to play at The Championships,  from 1988 through 1990 and publicly stated that he did not wish to play there because of the event's  particularly its "predominantly white" dress code to which players at the event are required to conform. Strong performances on the tour meant that Agassi was quickly tipped as a future Grand Slam champion. While still a teenager, he reached the semifinals of both the French Open and the US Open (tennis)|US Open in 1988, and made the US Open semifinals in 1989. He began the 1990s, however, with a series of near-misses. He reached his first Grand Slam final in 1990 at the French Open, where he was favored before losing in four sets to Andrés Gómez. He reached his second Grand Slam final of the year at the US Open, defeating defending champion Boris Becker in the semifinals. His opponent in the final was Pete Sampras; a year earlier, Agassi had beaten Sampras 6–2, 6–1, after which he told his coach that he felt bad for Sampras because he was never going to make it as a pro. Agassi lost the US Open final to Sampras 4–6, 3–6, 2–6.   The rivalry between these two American players became the dominant rivalry in tennis over the rest of the decade. Also in 1990, Agassi helped the United States win its first Davis Cup in 8 years and won his only Tennis Masters Cup, beating reigning Wimbledon champion Stefan Edberg in the final. In 1991, Agassi reached his second consecutive French Open final, where he faced fellow Bollettieri Academy alumnus Jim Courier. Courier emerged the victor in a five set final. Agassi decided to play at Wimbledon in 1991, leading to weeks of speculation in the media about the clothes he would wear. He eventually emerged for the first round in a completely white outfit. He went on to reach the quarterfinals on that occasion, losing in five sets to David Wheaton. Agassi's Grand Slam tournament breakthrough came at Wimbledon, not at the French Open or the US Open, where he had previously enjoyed success. In 1992, he defeated Goran Ivanišević in a five-set final.   Along the way, Agassi overcame two former Wimbledon champions, Boris Becker and John McEnroe. No other baseliner would triumph at Wimbledon until Lleyton Hewitt ten years later. Agassi was named the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Overseas  Overseas Sports Personality of the Year in 1992. Agassi once again played on the United States' Davis Cup winning team in 1992. It was their second Davis cup title in three years. 1993 saw Agassi win the only doubles title of his career, at the Cincinnati Masters, partnered with Petr Korda. Agassi missed much of the early part of that year with injuries. Although he made the quarterfinals in his Wimbledon title defense, he lost to eventual champion and world no. 1 Pete Sampras in five sets. Agassi lost in the first round at the US Open to Thomas Enqvist and required wrist surgery late in the year.  With new coach Brad Gilbert on board, Agassi began to employ more of a tactical, consistent approach, which fueled his resurgence. Agassi started slowly in 1994, losing in the first week at the French Open and Wimbledon. Nevertheless, Agassi emerged during the hard-court season, winning the Canada  Open. His comeback culminated at the 1994 US Open (tennis)|1994 US Open with a five-set fourth-round victory against compatriot Michael Chang, and then becoming the first man to capture the US Open as an Seed  player, beating Michael Stich in the final.   In 1995, Agassi shaved his balding head, breaking with his old "image is everything" style. He competed in the 1995 Australian Open (his first appearance at the event) and won, beating Sampras in a four-set final.   Agassi and Sampras met in five tournament finals in 1995, all on hardcourt, with Agassi winning three. Agassi won three Masters Series events in 1995 (Cincinnati  Miami Masters|Key Biscayne, and the Canadian Open) and seven titles total.   He compiled a career-best 26-match winning streak during the summer hard-court circuit, which ended when he lost the 1995 US Open (tennis)|US Open final to Sampras. Agassi reached the List of ATP number 1 ranked players|world no. 1 ranking for the first time in April 1995. He held that ranking until November, for a total of 30 weeks. In terms of win/loss record, 1995 was Agassi's best year. He won 73 matches and lost only 9. Agassi was also once again a key player on the United States' Davis Cup winning team—the third and final Davis Cup title of Agassi's career. 1996 was a less successful year for Agassi, as he failed to reach any Grand Slam final. He suffered two early-round losses at the hands of compatriots Chris Woodruff and Doug Flach at the French Open and Wimbledon, respectively, and lost to Chang in straight sets in the Australian and US Open semifinals. At the time, Agassi blamed the Australian Open loss on the windy conditions, but later said in his biography that he had lost the match on purpose, as he did not want to play Boris Becker, whom he would have faced in that final. The high point for Agassi was winning the men's singles gold medal at the 1996 Summer  Games in Atlanta, beating Sergi Bruguera of Spain in the final, 6–2, 6–3, 6–1.   Agassi also successfully defended his singles titles in Cincinnati and Key Biscayne. 1997 was the low point of Agassi's career. His wrist injury resurfaced, and he played only 24 matches during the year. He would later confess that he started using   at that time, allegedly on the urging of a friend.  He failed an ATP drug test, but wrote a letter claiming the same friend had spiked a drink. The ATP dropped the failed drug test as a warning. In his autobiography, Agassi admitted that the letter was a lie. He quit the drug soon after. He won no top-level titles and his ranking sank to world no. 141 on November 10, 1997, prompting many to believe that his run as one of the sport's premier competitors was over and that he would never again win any significant championships.     serving In 1998, Agassi began a rigorous conditioning program and worked his way back up the rankings by playing in Challenger Series tournaments, a circuit for pro players ranked outside the wor
Austro-Asiatic languages	The Austro-Asiatic  languages, in recent  synonymous with Mon–Khmer , are a large language family of Southeast Asia, also scattered throughout India and Bangladesh. The name  comes from the Latin words for "south" and "Asia", hence "South Asia". Among these languages, only Khmer  Vietnamese  and Mon language|Mon have a  recorded history, and only Vietnamese and Khmer have official status (in Vietnam and Cambodia, respectively). The rest of the languages are spoken by minority groups. "Ethnologue" identifies 168 Austro-Asiatic languages. These form thirteen established families (plus perhaps Shompen  which is poorly attested, as a fourteenth), which have traditionally been grouped into two, as Mon–Khmer  and Munda  However, several recent  have abandoned Mon–Khmer as a valid node, either reducing it in scope or making it synonymous with the larger family (Diffloth 2005, Sidwell 2009). Austro-Asiatic languages have a disjunct distribution across India, Bangladesh and Southeast Asia, separated by regions where other languages are spoken. It is widely believed that the Austro-Asiatic languages are the autochthonous languages of Southeast Asia and the eastern Indian subcontinent, and that the other languages of the region, including the Indo-European  Tai–Kadai  Dravidian  Austronesian  and Sino-Tibetan languages, are the result of later human  of people. ==Morphology== The Austro-Asiatic languages are well known for having a  pattern, with basic nouns and verbs consisting of a reduced minor syllable plus a full syllable. Many of them also have infixes.  Much work has been done on the reconstruction of  in Harry L. Shorto's "Mon–Khmer Comparative Dictionary". However, very little work has been done on  itself, since the Munda languages are not well documented. If Mon–Khmer is not a valid taxon, as some recent  would have it, then  becomes synonymous with  Sidwell (2005) reconstructs the consonant inventory of  as follows: {| class="IPA wikitable" |-  |-  |-  || |-  |- |*w||*l, *r||*j|| || |- | ||*s|| || ||*h |} This is identical to earlier  except for . is better preserved in the Katuic languages, which Sidwell has specialized in. Sidwell (2007, 2009) suggests that the likely homeland of  is near central Vietnam, and that the family is not as old as frequently assumed.  Linguists traditionally recognize two primary divisions of  the Mon–Khmer languages of Southeast Asia, North-East  India and the Nicobar Islands, and the Munda languages of East India|East and Central India and parts of Bangladesh. However, no evidence for this classification has ever been published. Each of the families that is written in boldface type below is accepted as a valid clade. By contrast, the relationships "between" these families within Austro-Asiatic is debated. In addition to the traditional  two recent proposals are given, neither of which accept traditional "Mon–Khmer" as a valid unit. However, little of the data used for competing  has ever been published, and therefore cannot be evaluated by peer review. ===Sidwell (2009)=== Sidwell (2009a), in a  comparison of 36 languages which are well-known enough to exclude loan words, finds little evidence for internal branching, though he did find an area of increased contact between the Bahnaric and Katuic languages, such that languages of all branches apart from the geographically distant Munda and Nicobarese show greater similarity to Bahnaric and Katuic the closer they are to those branches, without any noticeable innovations common to Bahnaric and Katuic. He therefore takes the conservative view that the thirteen branches of Austro-Asiatic should be treated as equidistant on current evidence. }} Sidwell & Blench (2011) suggest Shompen  as an additional branch. ===Gérard Diffloth (2005)=== Gérard  compares  of various clades, and attempts to classify them based on shared innovations, though like other  the evidence has not been published. As a schematic, we have: |2= }} }} |label2= Khasi–Khmuic   Khmuic |2= }} }} |label3= Nuclear Mon–Khmer   |3= |2= }} }} |2= }} }} }} }} Or in more detail, * Munda languages (India) :* Koraput : 7 languages :*Core Munda languages ::*  : 2 languages ::*North Munda languages ::: "Korku  ::: Kherwarian : 12 languages * Khasi–Khmuic languages (Northern Mon–Khmer) :* Khasic  : 3 languages of eastern India and Bangladesh  languages ::* Khmuic  : 13 languages of Laos and Thailand  languages ::: Pakanic or Pakanic  : 4 or 5 languages of southern China and Vietnam ::: Palaungic  : 21 languages of Burma, southern China, and Thailand * Nuclear Mon–Khmer languages :* Khmero-Vietic languages (Eastern Mon–Khmer) ::* Vieto-Katuic languages ?  Sidwell (2005) casts doubt on Diffloth's Vieto-Katuic hypothesis, saying that the evidence is ambiguous, and that it is not clear where Katuic belongs in the family. ::: Vietic  : 10 languages of Vietnam and Laos, including the Vietnamese language, which has the most speakers of any Austro-Asiatic language. These are the only Austro-Asiatic languages to have highly developed tone systems. ::: Katuic  : 19 languages of Laos, Vietnam, and Thailand. ::*  languages :::* Bahnaric  : 40 languages of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. :::*Khmeric languages :::: The Khmer language|Khmer dialects of Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam. :::: Pearic  : 6 languages of Cambodia. :* Nico-Monic languages (Southern Mon–Khmer) ::* Nicobarese  : 6 languages of the Nicobar Islands, a territory of India. ::* Asli-Monic languages ::: Aslian  : 19 languages of peninsular Malaysia and Thailand. ::: Monic  : 2 languages, the Mon language of Burma and the Nyah Kur  language of Thailand. This family tree is consistent with recent studies of migration of Y-Chromosomal haplogroup O2b-M95. However, the dates obtained from DNA studies are several times older than that given by linguists.  Kumar, Vikrant et al, Y-chromosome evidence suggests a common paternal heritage of Austro-Asiatic populations, BMC Evol Biol. 2007, 7: 47. The route map of the people with haplogroup O2b, speaking this language can be seen in this link. ===Ilia Peiros (2004)=== Peiros is a   based on percentages of shared vocabulary. This means that a language may appear to be more distantly related than it actually is due to language contact. Indeed, when Sidwell (2009a) replicated Peiros's study with languages known well enough to account for loans, he did not find the internal (branching) structure below.  tree  * Nicobarese  *Munda–Khmer ** Munda  **Mon–Khmer  *** Khasi language|Khasi ***Nuclear Mon–Khmer ****Pakanic  (Mang language|Mang + Bolyu  (perhaps in Northern MK) **** Vietic  (perhaps in Northern MK) ****Northern Mon–Khmer ***** Palaungic  ***** Khmuic  ****Central Mon–Khmer ***** Khmer language|Khmer dialects ***** Pearic   ****** Aslian   ******* Monic   ******** Katuic  ******** Bahnaric  ===Diffloth (1974)=== Gérard  widely cited original  now abandoned by Diffloth himself, is used in "Encyclopædia Britannica" and—except for the breakup of Southern  "Ethnologue." * Munda  **North Munda *** Korku *** Kherwarian **South Munda *** Kharia–Juang *** Koraput Munda *Mon–Khmer  **Eastern Mon–Khmer *** Khmer language|Khmer (Cambodian) *** Pearic  *** Bahnaric  *** Katuic  *** Vietic  (includes Vietnamese) **Northern Mon–Khmer *** Khasi language|Khasi (Meghalaya, India) *** Palaungic  *** Khmuic  **Southern Mon–Khmer *** Mon language|Mon *** Aslian  (Peninsular  *** Nicobarese  (Nicobar Islands) ==Writing systems== Other than Latin-based alphabets, many Austro-Asiatic languages are written with the Thai alphabet and Lao alphabet. *Chu Nom|Chữ Nôm *Khmer alphabet *Ol Chiki alphabet (Santali  alphabet) *Sorang Sompeng alphabet (Sora language|Sora alphabet) *Varang Kshiti (Ho language|Ho alphabet) ==See also== *Austric languages ==Notes==  ==References== * Adams, K. L. (1989). "Systems of numeral classification in the Mon–Khmer, Nicobarese and Aslian subfamilies of  Canberra, A.C.T., Australia: Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. ISBN 0-85883-373-5 * Byomkes  Byomkes. (1994). "A Comparative Study of Santali and Bengali". *Diffloth, Gérard (2005). "The contribution of linguistic palaeontology and  in Laurent Sagart, Roger Blench and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas, eds. "The Peopling of East Asia: Putting Together Archaeology, Linguistics and Genetics." 77–80. London: Routledge Curzon. * Filbeck, D. (1978). "T'in: a historical study". Pacific linguistics, no. 49. Canberra: Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. ISBN 0-85883-172-4 * Hemeling, K. (1907). "Die Nanking Kuanhua". (German language) * Peck, B. M., Comp. (1988). "An Enumerative Bibliography of South Asian Language Dictionaries". * Peiros, Ilia. 1998. "Comparative Linguistics in Southeast Asia." Pacific Linguistics Series C, No. 142. Canberra: Australian National University. * Shorto, Harry L. edited by Sidwell, Paul, Cooper, Doug and Bauer, Christian (2006). "A Mon–Khmer comparative dictionary". Canberra: Australian National University. Pacific Linguistics. ISBN 0-85883-570-3 * Shorto, H. L.  of Mon–Khmer and Tai Linguistics". London oriental  v. 2. London: Oxford University Press, 1963. * Sidwell, Paul (2005). "Proto-Katuic Phonology and the Sub-grouping of Mon–Khmer Languages". In Sidwell, ed., "SEALSXV: papers from the 15th meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistic Society." *Sidwell, Paul (2009a).  The Austroasiatic Central Riverine Hypothesis]. Keynote address, SEALS, XIX. * Sidwell, Paul (2009b). "Classifying the Austroasiatic languages: history and state of the art". LINCOM studies in Asian linguistics, 76. Munich: Lincom Europa. * Zide, Norman H., and Milton E. Barker. (1966) "Studies in Comparative Austroasiatic Linguistics", The Hague: Mouton (Indo-Iranian monographs, v. 5.). ==External links==  lists for Austro-Asiatic  lists for Austro-Asiatic languages  Comparative Austro-Asiatic Swadesh vocabulary lists] (from Wiktionary's  Swadesh-list appendix])  The LINGUIST List MultiTree Project: Austro-Asiatic Family Trees]   Lectures by Paul Sidwell]  Ethnologue   Mon–Khmer languages at SEAlang]  languages  languages| az:Avstroasiya dilləri   br:Yezhoù  ca:Llengües   jazyky  sprog  Sprachen  γλώσσες es:Lenguas   lingvaro eu:Austroasiar hizkuntzak   fr:Langues      jezici ilo:Dagiti pagsasao nga  id:Rumpun bahasa Austro-Asiatik it:Lingue  jv:Basa Austro-Asiatik   la:Linguae   kalbos  nyelvcsalád  јазици   ms:Bahasa Austro-Asia  talen   språk  språk oc:Lengas  pl:Języki  pt:Línguas  qu:Urin anti asya rimaykuna  языки  језици  jezici  kielet  språk   мови vi:Hệ ngôn ngữ Nam Á  
Afroasiatic languages	Afroasiatic (alternatively Afro-Asiatic ), also known as Hamito-Semitic ,  is a large language  family, including about 375 living languages.   Ethnologue family tree for Afroasiatic languages] Afroasiatic languages are spoken predominantly in the Middle East, North Africa, the Horn of Africa, and parts of the Sahel. More than 300 million people speak an Afroasiatic language.  Daniel Don Nanjira,  African Foreign Policy and Diplomacy: From Antiquity to the 21st Century]", (ABC-CLIO: 2010). The most widely spoken Afroasiatic language is Arabic (including all its varieties of  varieties), with 230 million native speakers, spoken mostly in the Middle East and North Africa.  Languages of the World] Berber  languages are spoken in Morocco, Algeria, Libya and across the rest of North Africa and the Sahara|Sahara Desert by about 25 to 35 million people. Other widely spoken Afroasiatic languages are Amharic  the national language of Ethiopia, with 18 million native speakers; Somali  spoken by around 19 million people in Greater Somalia; and Hausa  the dominant language of northern Nigeria and southern Niger, spoken by 18.5 million people and used as a lingua franca in large parts of the Sahel,   Pereltsvaig, Asya (2012), "Languages of the World. An Introduction", Cambridge University Press, p.206. with some 25 million speakers in total.   Ethnologue - Hausa] In addition to languages spoken today, Afroasiatic includes several ancient languages, such as Egyptian  Egyptian, Akkadian  and Biblical Hebrew. ==Etymology== The Afroasiatic language family was originally referred to as  a term introduced in the 1860s by the German scholar Karl Richard Lepsius.  The name was later popularized by Friedrich Müller  Müller in his "Grundriss der  (Wien 1876-88).  The term "Afroasiatic" (often now spelled as  was later coined by Maurice Delafosse (1914). However, it did not come into general use until Joseph Greenberg (1963) formally proposed its adoption. In doing so, Greenberg sought to emphasize the fact that Afroasiatic was the only language family that was represented  in both Africa and Asia.   Individual scholars have also called the family "Erythraean" (Tucker 1966) and "Lisramic" (Hodge 1972). In lieu of  the Russian linguist Igor Diakonoff later suggested the term "Afrasian", meaning "half African, half Asiatic", in reference to the geographic distribution of the phylum's constituent languages.  The term  remains in use in the academic traditions of some European countries. ==Distribution and branches==  linguists' proposals for grouping within Afroasiatic The Afroasiatic language family is usually considered to include the following branches: * Berber  * Chadic  * Cushitic  * Egyptian  * Omotic  * Semitic  While there is general agreement on these six families, there are some points of disagreement among  who study Afroasiatic. In particular: * The Omotic language branch is the most controversial member of Afroasiatic since the grammatical formatives which most linguists have given greatest weight in classifying languages in the family "are either absent or distinctly wobbly" (Hayward 1995). Greenberg (1963) and others considered it a subgroup of Cushitic, while others have raised doubts about it being part of Afroasiatic at all (e.g. Theil 2006).  Sands, Bonny (2009). "Africa’s Linguistic Diversity". Language and Linguistics Compass 3/2 (2009): 559–580,  * The Afroasiatic identity of Ongota  is also broadly questioned, as is its position within Afroasiatic among those who accept it, due to the "mixed" appearance of the language and a paucity of research and data. Harold C. Fleming|Harold Fleming (2006) proposes that Ongota constitutes a separate branch of Afroasiatic.  Harrassowitz Verlag - The Harrassowitz Publishing House <!-- Bot generated title  ] Bonny Sands (2009) believes the most convincing proposal is by Savà and Tosco (2003), namely that Ongota is an East Cushitic language with a Nilo-Saharan  substratum. In other words, the Ongota people would appear to have once spoken a Nilo-Saharan language but then shifted to speaking a Cushitic language, while retaining some  of their earlier Nilo-Saharan language.  * Beja language|Beja is sometimes listed as a separate branch of Afroasiatic but is more often included in the Cushitic branch, which has a high degree of internal diversity. * Whether the various branches of Cushitic actually form a language family is sometimes questioned, but not their inclusion in Afroasiatic itself. * There is no consensus on the  of the five non-Omotic branches of Afroasiatic (see "Subgrouping" below). This situation is not unusual, even among  language families: there are also many disagreements concerning the internal classification of the Indo-European languages, for instance.  history== <!-- This section is linked from Berber people  In the 9th century, the Hebrew grammarian Judah ibn Kuraish|Judah ibn Quraysh of Tiaret in Algeria was the first to link two branches of Afroasiatic together; he perceived a relationship between Berber and Semitic. He knew of Semitic through his study of Arabic, Hebrew, and Aramaic. In the course of the 19th century, Europeans also began suggesting such relationships. In 1844, Theodor Benfey suggested a language family consisting of Semitic, Berber, and Cushitic (calling the latter "Ethiopic"). In the same year, T.N. Newman suggested a relationship between Semitic and Hausa, but this would long remain a topic of dispute and uncertainty. Friedrich Müller  Müller named the traditional  family in 1876 in his "Grundriss der  He defined it as consisting of a Semitic group plus a "Hamitic" group containing Egyptian, Berber, and Cushitic; he excluded the Chadic group. These  relied in part on non-linguistic  and racial arguments that have largely been discredited (see Hamitic hypothesis). Leo Reinisch (1909) proposed linking Cushitic and Chadic, while urging a more distant affinity to Egyptian and Semitic, thus foreshadowing Greenberg, but his suggestion found little resonance. Marcel Cohen (1924) rejected the idea of a distinct Hamitic subgroup and included Hausa (a Chadic language) in his comparative Hamito-Semitic vocabulary. Joseph Greenberg (1950) strongly confirmed Cohen's rejection of "Hamitic", added (and  the Chadic branch, and proposed the new name "Afroasiatic" for the family. Nearly all scholars have accepted Greenberg's  In 1969, Harold C. Fleming|Harold Fleming proposed that what had previously been known as Western Cushitic is an independent branch of Afroasiatic, suggesting for it the new name Omotic  This proposal and name have met with widespread acceptance. Several scholars, including Harold Fleming and Robert Hetzron, have since questioned the traditional inclusion of Beja in Cushitic.  {|   float:right;" |+ Proposed Afroasiatic sub-divisions |- ! Greenberg (1963) !! Newman (1980) !! Fleming (post-1981) !! Ehret (1995) |-  | * Semitic * Egyptian * Berber * Cushitic ** Northern Cushitic <br  (equals Beja) ** Central Cushitic ** Eastern Cushitic ** Western Cushitic <br  (equals Omotic) ** Southern Cushitic * Chadic | *  * Egypto-Semitic * Cushitic (excludes Omotic) | * Omotic * Erythraean ** Cushitic ** Ongota ** Non-Ethiopian *** Chadic *** Berber *** Egyptian *** Semitic *** Beja | * Omotic ** North Omotic ** South Omotic * Erythrean ** Cushitic *** Beja *** Agaw *** East–South Cushitic **** Eastern Cushitic **** Southern Cushitic ** North Erythrean *** Chadic *** Boreafrasian **** Egyptian **** Berber **** Semitic |- ! Orel & Stobova (1995) !! Diakonoff (1996) !! Bender (1997) !! Militarev (2000) |-  | *  *  * Omotic * Beja * Agaw * Sidamic * East Lowlands * Rift | * East–West Afrasian ** Berber ** Cushitic ** Semitic * North–South Afrasian ** Chadic ** Egyptian (excludes Omotic) | * Omotic * Chadic * Macro-Cushitic ** Berber ** Cushitic ** Semitic | * North Afrasian ** African North Afrasian *** Chado-Berber *** Egyptian ** Semitic * South Afrasian ** Omotic ** Cushitic |} Little agreement exists on the subgrouping  of the five or six branches of Afroasiatic: Semitic, Egyptian, Berber, Chadic, Cushitic, and Omotic. However, Christopher Ehret (1979), Harold Fleming (1981), and Joseph Greenberg (1981) all agree that the Omotic branch split from the rest first. Otherwise: * Paul Newman  Newman (1980) groups Berber with Chadic and Egyptian with Semitic, while questioning the inclusion of Omotic in Afroasiatic. Rolf Theil (2006) concurs with the exclusion of Omotic, but does not otherwise address the structure of the family.  * Harold Fleming (1981) divides non-Omotic Afroasiatic, or "Erythraean", into three groups, Cushitic, Semitic, and  He later added Semitic and Beja to  and tentatively proposed Ongota  as a new third branch of Erythraean. He thus divided Afroasiatic into two major branches, Omotic and Erythraean, with Erythraean consisting of three sub-branches, Cushitic,  and Ongota. * Like Harold Fleming, Christopher Ehret (1995: 490) divides Afroasiatic into two branches, Omotic and Erythrean. He divides Omotic into two branches, North Omotic and South Omotic. He divides Erythrean into Cushitic, comprising Beja, Agaw, and East-South Cushitic, and North Erythrean, comprising Chadic and  According to his  Boreafrasian consists of Egyptian, Berber, and Semitic. * Vladimir Orel and Olga Stolbova (1995) group Berber with Semitic and Chadic with Egyptian. They split up Cushitic into five or more independent branches of Afroasiatic, viewing Cushitic as a Sprachbund rather than a language family. * Igor M. Diakonoff (1996) subdivides Afroasiatic in two, grouping Berber, Cushitic, and Semitic together as East-West Afrasian (ESA), and Chadic with Egyptian as North-South Afrasian (NSA). He excludes Omotic from Afroasiatic. * Lionel Bender  Bender (1997) groups Berber, Cushitic, and Semitic together as  He regards Chadic and Omotic as the branches of Afroasiatic most remote from the others. * Alexander Militarev (2000), on the basis of  groups Berber with Chadic and both more distantly with Semitic, as against Cushitic and Omotic. He places Ongota in South Omotic. ==Position among the world's languages== Afroasiatic is one of the four languages of  families of Africa identified by Joseph Greenberg in his book "The Languages of Africa" (1963). It is the only one that extends outside of Africa, via the Semitic branch. There are no generally accepted relations between Afroasiatic and any other language family. However, several proposals grouping Afroasiatic with one or more other language families have been made. The best-known of these are the following: * Hermann Möller (1906) argued for a relation between Semitic  and the Indo-European languages. This proposal was accepted by some linguists (e.g. Holger Pedersen  Pedersen and Louis Hjelmslev) but has little currency today. (For a fuller account, see Indo-Semitic languages.) * Apparently influenced by Möller (a colleague of his at the University of Copenhagen), Holger Pedersen  Pedersen included Hamito-Semitic (the term replaced by Afroasiatic) in his proposed Nostratic  macro-family (cf. Pedersen  which also included the Indo-European, Finno-Ugric  Samoyed  Turkic  Mongolic  Tungusic  and Yukaghir  languages. This inclusion was retained by subsequent Nostraticists, starting with Vladislav Illich-Svitych and Aharon Dolgopolsky. * Joseph Greenberg (2000–2002) did not reject a relationship of Afroasiatic to these other languages, but he considered it more distantly related to them than they were to each other, grouping instead these other languages in a separate macro-family, which he called Eurasiatic  and to which he added   Nivkh  Korean  Japonic  Eskimo–Aleut  and Ainu  * Most recently, Sergei Anatolyevich  Starostin's school has accepted Eurasiatic as a subgroup of Nostratic, with Afroasiatic, Dravidian, and Kartvelian in Nostratic outside of Eurasiatic. An even larger Borean  group would contain Nostratic as well as   and Austric  ==Date
Andorra	 of arms of  coat of arms at Andorran parliament. Andorra (; , ), officially the Principality of Andorra (), also called the Principality of the Valleys of Andorra , Funk and Wagnalls Encyclopedia, 1991 (Catalan: "Principat de les Valls d'Andorra"), is a landlocked  microstate in southwestern Europe, located in the eastern Pyrenees mountains and bordered by Spain and France. It is the sixth European  nation in Europe having an area of and an estimated population of 100,000 in 2012. Its capital, Andorra la Vella, is the highest capital city in Europe, at an elevation of AMSL|above sea level.  Maps, Weather, and Airports for Andorra la Vella, Andorra] The official language is Catalan  although Spanish, Portuguese, and French are also commonly spoken. The Principality was formed in 1278. The coregency|role of monarch is exercised jointly by the two co-princes, the Catalan Bishop of Urgell and the President of France (the whole state is a part of the Diocese of Urgell). Andorra is a prosperous country mainly because of its tourism industry, which services an estimated 10.2 million visitors annually,    Departament  Govern d'Andorra. and also because of its status as a tax haven. It is not a member of the European Union, but the euro is the "de facto" currency. The people of Andorra have the  highest human life expectancy in the world — 82 years at birth.  ==History== Tradition holds that Charles the Great (Charlemagne) granted a charter to the Andorran people in return for fighting against the Moors.  of the territory was by the Count of Urgell and eventually by the bishop of the Diocese of Urgell. In 988, Borrell II, Count of Urgell, gave the Andorran valleys to the Diocese of Urgell in exchange for land in Cerdanya.  Since then the Bishop of Urgell, based in la Seu d'Urgell|Seu d'Urgell, has owned Andorra.  Before 1095, Andorra did not have any type of military protection and the Bishop of Urgell, who knew that the Count of Urgell wanted to reclaim the Andorran valleys,  asked for help and protection from the Lord of Caboet. In 1095, the Lord of Caboet and the Bishop of Urgell signed under oath a declaration of their co-sovereignty over Andorra. Arnalda, daughter of Arnau of Caboet, married the Viscount of Castellbò and both became Viscounts of Castellbò and Cerdanya. Years later their daughter, Ermessenda, married Roger Bernat II, the France|French Count of Foix. They became Roger Bernat II and Ermessenda I, Counts of Foix, Viscounts of Castellbò and Cerdanya, and also co-sovereigns of Andorra (shared with the Bishop of Urgell). In the 11th century, a dispute arose between the Bishop of Urgell and the Count of Foix. The conflict was resolved in 1278 with the mediation of Aragon by the signing of the first Paréage of Andorra 1278|paréage which provided that Andorra's sovereignty be shared between the count of Foix  (whose title would ultimately transfer to the French head of state) and the Bishop of Urgell, in Catalonia. This gave the principality its territory and political form. Over the years, the French co-title to Andorra passed to the kings of Kingdom of  After Henry of Navarre became King Henry IV of France, he issued an edict in 1607 that established the head of the French state and the Bishop of Urgell as co-princes of Andorra. In 1812–13, the First French Empire annexed Catalonia and divided it in four départements, with Andorra being made part of the district of Puigcerdà (département of Sègre). ===20th century=== Andorra declared war on Imperial Germany during World War I, but did not actually take part in the fighting. It remained in an official state of belligerency until 1957 as it was not included in the Treaty of Versailles. In 1933, France occupied Andorra as a result of social unrest before elections. On July 12, 1934, adventurer Boris Skossyreff issued a proclamation in Urgell, declaring himself "Boris I, King of Andorra", simultaneously declaring war on the Bishop of Urgell. He was arrested by Spanish authorities on July 20 and ultimately expelled from Spain. From 1936 to 1940, a French detachment was garrisoned in Andorra to prevent influences of the Spanish Civil War and Franco's Spain. Francoist troops reached the Andorran border in the later stages of the war. During World War II, Andorra remained neutral and was an important smuggling route between Vichy France and Spain. Given its relative isolation, Andorra has existed outside the mainstream of European history, with few ties to countries other than France and Spain. In recent times, however, its thriving tourist industry along with developments in transport and communications have removed the country from its isolation. Its political system was modernised in 1993, when it became a member of the United Nations and the Council of Europe. ==Politics== <!--Please add new information to relevant articles of the  Andorra is a parliamentary  with the President of the French  of France and the Bishop of Urgell (Catalonia, Spain), as List of Co-Princes of  This peculiarity makes the President of France, in his capacity as Prince of Andorra, an elected reigning monarch, even though he is not elected by a popular vote of the Andorran people. The politics of Andorra take place in a framework of a parliamentary  representative democracy, whereby the Prime Minister of Andorra is the head of government, and of a  multi-party system. The current Prime Minister is Antoni Martí of the Democrats for Andorra (DA). Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both government and parliament. The Parliament of Andorra is known as the General Council. The General Council consists of between 28 and 42 Councillors, as the members of the legislative branch are called. The Councillors serve for four-year terms and elections are held between the thirtieth and fortieth days following the dissolution of the previous Council. The Councillors can be elected on two equal  Half are elected in equal number from each of the seven administrative parishes and the other half of the Councillors are elected from a single national constituency. 15 days after the election, the Councillors hold their inauguration. During this session, the Syndic General, who is the head of the General Council, and the Subsyndic General, his assistant, are elected. Eight days later, the Council convenes once more. During this session the Head of Government, the Prime Minister of Andorra, is chosen from among the Councillors.  de la Vall, Andorran Parliament. Candidates for the  nomination can be proposed by a minimum of one-fifth of the Councillors. The Council then elects the candidate with the absolute majority of votes to be Head of Government. The Syndic General then notifies the Co-princes who in turn appoint the elected candidate as the Prime Minister of Andorra. The General Council is also responsible for proposing and passing laws. Bills may be presented to the Council as Private Members' Bills by three of the Local Parish Councils jointly or by at least one tenth of the citizens of Andorra. The Council also approves the annual budget of the principality. The government must submit the proposed budget for parliamentary approval at least two months before the previous budget expires. If the budget is not approved by the first day of the next year, the previous budget is extended until a new one is approved. Once any bill is approved, the Syndic General is responsible for presenting it to the Co-princes so that they may sign and enact it. If the Head of Government is not satisfied with the Council, he may request that the Co-princes dissolve the Council and order new elections. In turn, the Councillors have the power to remove the Head of Government from office. After a motion of censure is approved by at least one-fifth of the Councillors, the Council will vote and if it receives the absolute majority of votes, the Prime Minister is removed. ==Law and criminal justice== The judiciary is composed of the Magistrates Court, the Criminal Law Court, the High Court of Andorra, and the Constitutional Court. The High Court of Justice is composed of five judges: one appointed by the Head of Government, one each by the Coprinces, one by the Syndic General, and one by the Judges and Magistrates. It is presided over by the member appointed by the Syndic General and the judges hold office for six-year terms. The Magistrates and Judges are appointed by the High Court, and so is the President of the Criminal Law Court. The High Court also appoints members of the Office of the Attorney General. The Constitutional Court is responsible for interpreting the Constitution and reviewing all appeals of  against laws and treaties. It is composed of four judges, one appointed by each of the Coprinces and two by the General Council. They serve eight-year terms. The Court is presided over by one of the Judges on a two-year rotation so that each judge at one point will be the leader of the Court. ==Foreign relations, defence, and security== Andorra does not have its own armed forces, although there is a small ceremonial army (see below). Responsibility for defending the nation rests primarily with France and Spain.  BOE.es - Documento  <!-- Bot generated title  ] However, in case of emergencies or natural disasters, the "Sometent" (an alarm) is called and all able-bodied men between 21 and 60 of Andorran nationality must serve.  El Sometent | Tourism <!-- Bot generated title  ]   This is why all Andorrans, and especially the head of each house (usually the eldest able-bodied man of a house), should by law, keep a rifle, even though the law also states that the police will offer a fire-arm in case of need.  Andorra is a full member of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), and has a special agreement with the European Union. ===Military of Andorra=== Andorra has a small army, which has historically been raised or reconstituted at various dates, but has never in modern times amounted to a standing army. The basic principle of Andorran defence is that all able-bodied men are available to fight if called upon by the sounding of the "Sometent". The duties of the Andorran Army are entirely ceremonial. In the modern era, the army has consisted of a very small body of volunteers willing to undertake ceremonial duties. Uniforms were handed down from generation to generation within families and communities. Despite not being involved in any fighting, Andorra was technically the longest combatant in the first World War, as the country was left out of the Versailles Peace Conference and technically remained at war with Germany from 1914 until 1939. Reported  here]. The army's role in internal security was largely taken over by the formation of the Andorran police service in 1931. Brief civil disorder associated with the elections of 1933, led to assistance being sought from the French police, <!-- Reference removed, as site quoted is currently on WP blacklist  with a detachment resident in Andorra for two months under the command of René-Jules Baulard.  World Statesmen], retrieved 3 May 2012, details at bottom of page. The Andorran Army was reformed in the following year (1934) with eleven soldiers appointed to supervisory roles. Details reported in  The Times] newspaper (London), 05-Jan-1934. These consisted of six Corporals, one for each parish (although there are currently seven parishes, there were only six until 1978), plus four junior staff officers to coordinate action, and a commander with the rank of Major. It was the responsibility of the six corporals, each in his own parish, to be able to raise a fighting force from amongst the able-bodied men of the parish. Today a small 11 man ceremonial unit remains the only permanent section of the Andorran army, but all able-bodied men remain technically available for military service, US Dept of State  website]. with a requirement for each fami
Arithmetic mean	In mathematics and statistics, the arithmetic mean , or simply the mean or average when the context is clear, is the central tendency of a collection of numbers taken as the sum of the numbers divided by the size of the collection. The collection is often the sample space of an Experiment (probability  The term "arithmetic mean" is preferred in mathematics and statistics because it helps distinguish it from other average|means such as the geometric mean|geometric and harmonic mean. In addition to mathematics and statistics, the arithmetic mean is used frequently in fields such as economics, sociology, and history, though it is used in almost every academic field to some extent. For example, per capita GDP gives an approximation of the arithmetic average income of a nation's population. While the arithmetic mean is often used to report central  tendencies, it is not a robust statistic, meaning that it is greatly influenced by outliers. Notably, for skewed distributions, the arithmetic mean may not accord with one's notion of "middle", and robust statistics such as the median may be a better description of central tendency. ==Definition== Suppose we have sample space    . Then the arithmetic mean  A  is defined via the equation :   a_i  . If the list is a statistical population, then the mean of that population is called a population mean . If the list is a sampling  sample, we call the resulting statistic a sample mean . The arithmetic mean of a variable is often denoted by a bar, for example  \bar{x}  (read "x bar") would be the mean of some sample space  X  . ==Motivating properties== The arithmetic mean has several properties that make it useful, especially as a measure of central tendency. These include: *If numbers  x_1,\ldots,x_n  have mean X, then  (x_1-X) + \ldots + (x_n-X) = 0  . Since  x_i-X  is the distance from a given number to the mean, one way to interpret this property is as saying that the numbers to the left of the mean are balanced by the numbers to the right of the mean. The mean is the only single number for which the residuals defined this way sum to zero. *If it is required to use a single number "X" as an estimate for the value of numbers  x_1,\ldots,x_n  , then the arithmetic mean does this best, in the sense of minimizing the sum of squares ("x"  "i"  &minus; "X")  2  of the errors and residuals in  (It follows that the mean is also the best single predictor in the sense of having the lowest root mean squared error.) *For a normal distribution, the arithmetic mean is equal to both the median and the mode, other measures of central tendency. ==Problems==  mean median  of mean, median and mode  of two log-normal distributions with different skewness. The arithmetic mean may be misinterpreted as the median to imply that most values are higher or lower than is actually the case. If elements in the sample space arithmetic   when placed in some order, then the median and arithmetic average are equal. For example, consider the sample space {1,2,3,4}. The average is 2.5, as is the median. However, when we consider a sample space that cannot be arranged into an arithmetic progression, such as {1,2,4,8,16}, the median and arithmetic average can differ significantly. In this case the arithmetic average is 6.2 and the median is 4. When one looks at the arithmetic average of a sample space, one must note that the average value can vary significantly from most values in the sample space. There are applications of this phenomenon in many fields. For example, since the 1980s in the United States median income has increased more slowly than the arithmetic average of income. Researchers dealing with frequency data must also be careful when reporting summary statistics such as means or median. Where a phenomenon is rare in general (for example, emergency room visits among the general population), but occurs frequently in some people (for example, dare devils), then the mean value may be much lower than the median. ==Angles== Particular care must be taken when using cyclic data such as phases or angles. Naïvely taking the arithmetic mean of 1° and 359° yields a result of 180°. This is incorrect for two reasons: *Firstly, angle measurements are only defined up to a factor of Degree (angle)|360° (or 2π, if measuring in radians). Thus one could as easily call these 1° and &minus;1°, or 1° and 719° – each of which gives a different average. *Secondly, in this situation, 0° (equivalently, 360°) is geometrically a better "average" value: there is lower statistical  about it (the points are both 1° from it, and 179° from 180°, the putative average). In general application such an oversight will lead to the average value artificially moving towards the middle of the numerical range. A solution to this problem is to use the optimization formulation (viz, define the mean as the central point: the point about which one has the lowest dispersion), and redefine the difference as a modular distance (i.e., the distance on the circle: so the modular distance between 1° and 359° is 2°, not 358°). ==See also== *Assumed mean *Average *Central tendency  estimator *Consensus forecasts *Empirical measure *Fieller's theorem *Fréchet mean *Generalized mean *Geometric mean *Harmonic mean *Inequality of arithmetic and geometric means *Ky Fan inequality *Mean *Median *mode  *Muirhead's inequality *Sample mean and covariance *Sample size *Standard deviation *Summary statistics *Variance ==Further reading== *Darrell Huff, "How to lie with statistics", Victor Gollancz, 1954 (ISBN  ==References== ==External links==  Calculations and comparisons between arithmetic and geometric mean of two numbers] * Category:Means <!-- interwiki  ar:متوسط حسابي az:Ədədi orta   ca:Mitjana aritmètica  průměr  Mittel  keskmine es:Media aritmética eo:Aritmetika meznombro  aritmetiko sinple  حسابی fr:Moyenne arithmétique gl:Media aritmética ko:산술 평균    sredina it:Promedio  орта шама lt:Aritmetinis vidurkis hu:Számtani közép ms:Min aritmetik nl:Rekenkundig gemiddelde  nn:Aritmetisk middeltal  pms:Media aritmética pl:Średnia arytmetyczna pt:Média aritmética ro:Medie aritmetică    priemer  sredina  sredina  sredina su:Arithmetic mean  keskiarvo sv:Aritmetiskt medelvärde  tr:Aritmetik ortalama   ur:نمونہ اوسط vi:Trung bình cộng 
American Football Conference	The American Football Conference ( AFC ) is one of the two Conference  of the National Football League (NFL). This conference and its counterpart, the National Football Conference (NFC), currently contain 16 teams each, making up the 32 teams of the NFL. The American Football Conference originated as the American Football League (AFL), which joined with the NFL in the AFL–NFL merger of 1970. As such ten of its teams originally played in the AFL, while three others were NFL teams that were added to the AFC to equalize the number of franchises, and another three are more recent expansion teams (one, the Houston Texans, plays in the market from which one of the AFL's founding teams, now known as the Tennessee Titans, originated). ==Current teams== Since 2002, the AFC has comprised 16 teams, organized into four Division  each containing four teams: AFC East|East, AFC North|North, AFC South|South, and AFC West|West. {|    ! Division ! Team ! City/Town ! Stadium |- !  rowspan=4 | AFC East|East | Buffalo Bills | Orchard Park (town), New York|Orchard Park, New York|NY | Ralph Wilson Stadium and Rogers Centre (1 game per year) |- | Miami Dolphins | Miami Gardens, Florida|Miami Gardens, Florida|FL | Sun Life Stadium |- | New England Patriots | Foxborough,   | Gillette Stadium |- | New York Jets | East Rutherford, New Jersey|East Rutherford, New Jersey|NJ | MetLife Stadium |- !  rowspan=4 | AFC North|North | Baltimore Ravens | Baltimore, Maryland|MD | M&T Bank Stadium |- | Cincinnati Bengals | Cincinnati, Ohio|OH | Paul Brown Stadium |- | Cleveland Browns | Cleveland, Ohio|OH | Cleveland Browns Stadium |- | Pittsburgh Steelers | Pittsburgh,  | Heinz Field |- !  rowspan=4 | AFC South|South | Houston Texans | Houston, Texas|TX | Reliant Stadium |- | Indianapolis Colts | Indianapolis, Indiana|IN | Lucas Oil Stadium |- | Jacksonville Jaguars | Jacksonville,  Florida|FL | EverBank Field |- | Tennessee Titans | Nashville,  Tennessee|TN | LP Field |- !  rowspan=4 | AFC West|West | Denver Broncos | Denver, Colorado|CO | Sports Authority Field at Mile High |- | Kansas City Chiefs | Kansas City,  City, Missouri|MO | Arrowhead Stadium |- | Oakland Raiders | Oakland,  California|CA | O.co Coliseum |- | San Diego Chargers | San Diego, California|CA | Qualcomm Stadium |} ==Season structure== Image:NFL Schedule  sample scheduling grid, with a single team's (the Browns) schedule highlighted. Under this hypothetical schedule, the Browns would play the teams in blue twice and the teams in yellow once, for a total of 16 games. Each AFC team plays the other teams in its division twice (home and away) during the regular season, in addition to 10 other games assigned to their schedule by the NFL the previous May. Two of these games are assigned on the basis of the team's final division standing in the previous season. The remaining 8 games are split between the roster of two other NFL divisions. This assignment shifts each year. For instance, in the 2007 NFL season|2007 regular season, each team in the AFC West played one game against each team in both the AFC South and the NFC North. In this way division competition consists of common opponents, with the exception of the 2 games assigned on the strength of each team's prior division standing. (i.e. the division winner will face the other two division winners in the AFC divisions that they are not scheduled to play) The NFC operates according to the same system. At the end of each football season  there are NFL  games involving the top six teams in the AFC (the four division champions by place standing and the top two remaining  teams ("Wild card (sports)|wild cards") by record). The last two teams remaining play in the AFC Championship Game|AFC Championship game with the winner receiving the Lamar Hunt Trophy. The AFC champion plays the NFC champion in the Super Bowl. After Super Bowl XLIII the AFC has won 19 Super Bowls to the 21 won by the NFC. Since losing 13 consecutive Super Bowls in the 1980s and 1990s (Super Bowl  Bowl XXXI|XXXI), the AFC has won 9 of the last 15. The coach of the team with the best record that lost in the AFC Divisional round is the coach of the Pro Bowl. ==History== Image:American Football Conference logo  Football Conference logo From 1970 to 2009 The AFC was created after the NFL AFL-NFL Merger|merged with the American Football League (AFL) in 1970. All of the 10 former AFL teams along with the NFL's Cleveland Browns, Pittsburgh Steelers, and the   Colts joined the AFC. The two AFL divisions (East and West) were more or less intact, while the NFL's Century Division became the AFC Central. Since the merger, five expansion teams have joined the AFC and two have left, thus making the current total 16. When the Seattle Seahawks and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers joined the league in 1976, they were temporarily placed in the NFC and AFC respectively. This arrangement lasted for one season only before the two teams switched conferences. The Seahawks eventually returned to the NFC as a result of the 2002 NFL  realignment. The expansion Jacksonville Jaguars joined the AFC in 1995. Due to the Cleveland Browns relocation  controversy of the Cleveland Browns, a new AFC franchise called the Baltimore Ravens was officially established in 1996 while the Browns were reactivated in 1999. The Houston Texans were then added to the league in 2002, joining the AFC. Since 2001, the AFC has sent either the Indianapolis Colts, the New England Patriots, or the Pittsburgh Steelers to the Super Bowl every year except the 2002 NFL season, when the Oakland Raiders lost to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Super Bowl XXXVII. By contrast, the National Football Conference|NFC sent a different team each year until the 2011 NFL season, when the New York Giants made it to their second Super Bowl in that same time span, Super Bowl XLVI. ==Logo==  American Football Conference logo The merged league created a new logo for the AFC that took elements of the old AFL logo, specifically the "A" and the six stars surrounding it. The AFC logo basically remained unchanged from 1970 to 2009. The 2010 NFL season introduced an updated AFC logo, with the most notable revision being the removal of two stars (leaving four representing the four divisions of the AFC), and moving the stars inside the letter, similar to the NFC logo. ==Notes==  Football League  Football   established in 1970    bs:American Football Conference cs:American Football Conference da:American Football Conference de:American Football Conference es:Conferencia Americana (NFL) eo:American Football Conference fr:American Football Conference gl:Conferencia Americana da NFL  풋볼 콘퍼런스 hr:American Football Conference  (NFL) it:American Football Conference he:American Football Conference hu:American Football Conference nl:American Football Conference  no:American Football Conference pl:American Football Conference pt:American Football Conference     Football Conference    sh:American Football Conference fi:American Football Conference sv:American Football Conference 
Animal Farm	"Animal Farm " is an  novella by George Orwell published in England on 17 August 1945. According to Orwell, the book reflects events leading up to and during the History of the Soviet Union  era before the World War II|Second World War. Orwell, a democratic  socialist, "Why I Write" (1936) ("The Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell Volume 1 – An Age Like This 1945–1950" p.23 (Penguin)) was a critic of Joseph Stalin and hostile to  Stalinism, especially after his experiences with the NKVD and the Spanish Civil War. Orwell, writing in his review of Franz Borkenau's "The Spanish Cockpit" in "Time and Tide, 31 July 1937, and "Spilling the Spanish Beans", New English Weekly, 29 July 1937 In a letter to Yvonne Davet, Orwell described "Animal Farm" as his novel ""contre Stalin"". The original title was "Animal Farm: A Fairy Story", but the subtitle was dropped by U.S. publishers for its 1946 publication and subsequently all but one of the translations during Orwell's lifetime omitted the addition. Other variations in the title include: "A Satire" and "A Contemporary Satire". Orwell suggested the title "Union des républiques socialistes animales" for the French translation, which recalled the French name of the Soviet Union, "Union des républiques socialistes soviétiques", and which abbreviates to URSA, the Latin for "bear", a Russian bear|symbol of Russia. "Time" magazine chose the book as one of the 100 best  novels (1923 to 2005); it also places at number 31 on the Modern Library List of Best 20th-Century Novels. It won a Retrospective Hugo Award in 1996 and is also included in the Great Books of the Western World. The novel addresses not only the corruption of the revolution by its leaders but also how wickedness, indifference, ignorance, greed and Myopia#Society and culture|myopia corrupt the revolution. It portrays corrupt leadership as the flaw in revolution, rather than the act of revolution itself. It also shows how potential ignorance and indifference to problems within a revolution could allow horrors to happen if a smooth transition to a people's government is not achieved. == Plot summary == === Snowball's revolution === Old Major, the old boar on the Manor Farm, calls the animals on the farm for a meeting, where he compares the humans to parasites and teaches the animals a revolutionary song, 'Beasts of England'. When Major dies two young pigs, Snowball (Animal Farm)|Snowball and Napoleon (Animal  assume command and turn his dream into a Political  The animals revolt and drive the drunken and irresponsible Jones (Animal Farm)|Mr Jones from the farm, renaming it "Animal Farm". They adopt Seven Commandments of Animal-ism, the most important of which is, "All animals are Social  Snowball attempts to teach the animals reading and writing; food is plentiful, and the farm runs smoothly. The pigs elevate themselves to positions of leadership and set aside special food items, ostensibly for their personal health. Napoleon takes the pups from the farm dogs and trains them privately. When Mr Jones tries to retake the farm, the animals defeat him at what they call the "Battle of the Cowshed". Napoleon and Snowball struggle for leadership. When Snowball announces his idea for a windmill, Napoleon has his dogs chase Snowball away and declares himself leader. === Napoleon's rule === Napoleon enacts changes to the governance structure of the farm, replacing meetings with a committee of pigs, who will run the farm. Using a young pig named Squealer as a "mouthpiece", Napoleon announces that Snowball stole the idea for the windmill from him. The animals work harder with the promise of easier lives with the windmill. After a violent storm, the animals find the windmill annihilated. Napoleon and Squealer convince the animals that Snowball destroyed the windmill, although the scorn of the neighbouring farmers suggests that the windmill's walls were too thin. Once Snowball becomes a scapegoat, Napoleon begins Reign of Terror|purging the farm with his dogs, killing animals he accuses of consorting with Snowball. He and the pigs abuse their power, imposing more control while reserving privileges for themselves and rewriting history, villainising Snowball and glorifying Napoleon. Squealer justifies every statement Napoleon makes, even the pigs' alteration of the Seven Commandments of Animalism. "No animal shall sleep in beds" is changed to "No animal shall sleep in beds "with sheets"" when the pigs are discovered to have been sleeping in the old farmhouse. "No animal shall drink alcohol" is changed to "No animal shall drink alcohol "to excess"" when the pigs discover the farmer's whiskey. 'Beasts of England' is replaced by an anthem glorifying Napoleon, who appears to be adopting the lifestyle of a man. The animals, though cold, starving and overworked, remain convinced that they are better off than they were when under Mr Jones. Squealer abuses the animals' poor memories and invents numbers to show their improvement. Frederick (Animal Farm)|Mr Frederick, one of the neighbouring farmers, swindles Napoleon by buying old wood with forged money, and then attacks the farm, using Explosive  powder to blow up the restored windmill. Though the animals win the battle, they do so Pyrrhic victory|at great cost, as many, including Boxer, are wounded. Despite his injuries, Boxer continues working harder and harder, until he collapses while working on the windmill. Napoleon sends for a van to take Boxer to the veterinary surgeon's, explaining that better care can be given there. Benjamin the donkey, who "could read as well as any pig", Orwell, George (1946). Animal Farm. London: Penguin Group. p. 21. notices that the van belongs to "Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler" (a knacker), and attempts to mount a rescue; but the animals' attempts are futile. Squealer reports that the van was purchased by the hospital and the writing from the previous owner had not been repainted. He recounts a tale of Boxer's death in the hands of the best medical care. Shortly after Boxer's death, it is revealed that the pigs have purchased more whiskey. === Humanisation === Years pass, and the pigs learn to walk upright, carry whips and wear clothes. The Seven Commandments are reduced to a single phrase: "All animals are equal, but some animals are more equal than others". Napoleon holds a dinner party for the pigs and the humans of the area, who congratulate Napoleon on having the  but least fed animals in the country. Napoleon announces an alliance with the humans, against the labouring classes of both "worlds". He abolishes practices and traditions related to the Revolution, and changes the name of the farm to "The Manor Farm". The animals, overhearing the conversation, notice that the faces of the pigs have begun changing. During a poker match, an argument breaks out between Napoleon and Mr Pilkington when they both play the Ace of Spades, and the animals realise that the faces of the pigs look like the faces of humans, and no one can tell the difference between them. === Animalism === The pigs Snowball (Animal  Napoleon (Animal  and Squealer adapt Old Major's ideas into an actual political  which they formally name Animalism. Soon after, Napoleon and Squealer indulge in the vices of humans (drinking alcohol, sleeping in beds, trading). Squealer is employed to alter the Seven Commandments to account for this humanisation, an allusion to the Soviet government's revising of history in order to exercise control of the people's beliefs about themselves and their society.   The original commandments are: # Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy. # Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend. # No animal shall wear clothes. # No animal shall sleep in a bed. # No animal shall drink alcohol. # No animal shall kill any other animal. # All animals are equal. Later, Napoleon and his pigs secretly revise some commandments to clear them of accusations of law-breaking (such as "No animal shall drink alcohol" having "to excess" appended to it and "No animal shall sleep in a bed" with "with sheets" added to it). The changed commandments are as follows, with the changes bolded: # No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets. # No animal shall drink alcohol to excess. # No animal shall kill any other animal without cause. Eventually these are replaced with the maxims, "All animals are equal, "but some animals are more equal than others"", and "Four legs good, two legs "better!"" as the pigs become more human. This is an Irony|ironic twist to the original purpose of the Seven Commandments, which were supposed to keep order within Animal Farm by uniting the animals together against the humans, and by prevent animals from following the humans' evil habits. Through the revision of the commandments, Orwell demonstrates how simply political dogma can be turned into malleable propaganda.   == Characters == === Pigs === Old Major – An aged prize Middle White|Middle White boar provides the inspiration that fuels the Rebellion in the book. He is an allegory of Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin, the founders of communism, in that he draws up the principles of the revolution. His skull being put on revered public display also recalls Lenin, whose Lenin's  body was put on display.     Napoleon (Animal Farm)|Napoleon – "A large, rather fierce-looking Berkshire  boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but with a reputation for getting his own way", An allegory of Joseph Stalin,   Napoleon is the main villain of "Animal Farm". In the first French version of "Animal Farm", Napoleon is called ', the French form of Caesar  although another translation has him as '.   Snowball (Animal Farm)|Snowball – Napoleon's rival and original head of the farm after Jones' overthrow. He is mainly based on Leon Trotsky,   but also combines elements from Vladimir Lenin.   Squealer (Animal Farm)|Squealer – A small white fat porker who serves as Napoleon's right hand pig and minister of propaganda, holding a position similar to that of Vyacheslav    Minimus – A poetic pig who writes the second and third national anthems of "Animal Farm" after the singing of "Beasts of England" is banned. The Piglets – Hinted to be the children of Napoleon (albeit not explicitly stated) and are the first generation of animals actually subjugated to his idea of animal inequality. The young pigs – Four pigs who complain about Napoleon's takeover of the farm but are quickly silenced and later executed. Pinkeye – A minor pig who is mentioned only once; he is the pig that tastes Napoleon's food to make sure it is not poisoned, in response to rumours about an assassination attempt on Napoleon. === Humans === Jones (Animal Farm)|Mr Jones – The former owner of the farm, Jones is a very heavy drinker. The animals revolt against him after he drinks so much that he does not feed or take care of them. Mr Frederick – The tough owner of Pinchfield, a well-kept neighbouring farm, who briefly enters into an "alliance" with Napoleon. Pilkington (Animal Farm)|Mr Pilkington – The easy-going but crafty owner of Foxwood, a neighbouring farm overgrown with weeds. Mr Whymper – A man hired by Napoleon for the public relations of Animal Farm to human society, who is eventually used to procure luxuries like alcohol for the pigs. Mrs Jones – The wife of Mr Jones. When the animals begin their revolt, she escapes from the farm with her pet raven Moses following behind. Her character is expanded upon in the 1999 film version, where she is at first somewhat sympathetic to the animals' plight regarding the poor care her husband gives them. === Equines === Boxer (Animal Farm)|Boxer – Boxer is a loyal, kind, dedicated, and respectable horse, although quite dim-witted. Clover – Boxer's companion, constantly caring for him; she also acts as a matriarch of sorts for the other horses and the other animals in general. Mollie – Moll
Alaska	Alaska () is the List of U.S. states and territories by area|largest state in the United States by area. It is situated in the northwest extremity of the North America|North American continent, with Canada to the east, the Arctic Ocean to the north, and the Pacific Ocean to the west and south, with Russia further west across the Bering Strait. Alaska is the List of U.S. states and territories by population|4th least populous and the List of U.S. states and territories by population density|least densely populated of the 50 United States. Approximately half of Alaska's 722,718  residents live within the Anchorage metropolitan area. Alaska was Alaska  from Russia on March 30, 1867, for $7.2 million ($}} in today's dollars) at approximately two cents per acre ($4.74/km²). The land went through several administrative changes before becoming an Territories of the United  (or incorporated) territory on May 11, 1912, and the 49th state of the U.S. on January 3, 1959. The name "Alaska" (Аляска) was already introduced in the Russian colonial period, when it was used only for the Alaska  and is derived from the Aleut language|Aleut "alaxsxaq", meaning "the mainland" or, more literally, "the object towards which the action of the sea is directed". Ransom, J. Ellis. 1940. "Derivation of the Word "Alaska"'. American Anthropologist n.s., 42: pp. 550–551 It is also known as Alyeska, the "great land", an Aleut word derived from the same root. ==Geography== Alaska has a longer coastline than all the other U.S. states combined. It is the only non-contiguous U.S. state on continental North America; about of British Columbia (Canada) separates Alaska from Washington  state. Alaska is thus an exclave of the United States. It is technically part of the Continental United  U.S., but is often not included in colloquial use; Alaska is not part of the contiguous U.S., often called Outside (Alaska)|"the Lower 48". The other three exclaves of the United States are the Northwest Angle of Minnesota, Point Roberts, Washington and Alburgh, Vermont. The capital city, Juneau, is situated on the mainland of the North American continent, but is not connected by road to the rest of the North American highway system. The state is bordered by the Yukon Territory and British Columbia in Canada, to the east, the Gulf of Alaska and the Pacific Ocean to the south, the Bering Sea, Bering Strait, and Chukchi Sea to the west and the Arctic Ocean to the north. Alaska's territorial waters touch Russia's territorial waters in the Bering Strait, as the Russian Big Diomede Island and Alaskan Little Diomede Island are only apart. With the extension of the Aleutian Islands into the eastern hemisphere, it is technically both the westernmost and easternmost state in the United States, as well as also being the northernmost. File:Alaska area compared to conterminous  size compared with the contiguous United States|48 contiguous states. Alaska is the largest state in the United States in land area at , over twice the size of Texas, the next largest state. Alaska is larger than all but 18 sovereign countries. Counting territorial waters, Alaska is larger than the combined area of the next three largest states: Texas, California, and Montana. It is also larger than the combined area of the 22 smallest U.S. states. ===Regions=== There are no officially defined borders demarcating the various regions of Alaska, but there are six widely accepted regions: ====South Central==== The most populous region of Alaska, containing Anchorage, the  Valley and the Kenai Peninsula. Rural, mostly unpopulated areas south of the Alaska Range and west of the Wrangell Mountains also fall within the definition of Southcentral, as well as the Prince William Sound area and the communities of Cordova, Alaska|Cordova and Valdez, Alaska|Valdez.  Also referred to as the Panhandle or Inside Passage, this is the region of Alaska closest to the rest of the United States. As such, this was where most of the initial non-indigenous settlement occurred in the years following the Alaska Purchase. The region is dominated by the Alexander Archipelago as well as the Tongass National Forest, the largest national forest in the United States. It contains the state capital, Juneau, the former capital, Sitka, and Ketchikan, at one time Alaska's largest city.  SitNews, "1927: When Ketchikan was the Largest City in Alaska"] The Alaska Marine Highway provides a vital surface transportation link throughout the area, as only three communities (Haines, Alaska|Haines, Hyder, Alaska|Hyder and Skagway,  enjoy direct connections to the contiguous North American road system.  File:Denali Mt  McKinley is both the highest peak in Alaska and in all of North America. The largest region of Alaska, much of it uninhabited wilderness. Fairbanks is the only community of any significant size. Small towns and Native villages are scattered throughout, mostly along the highway and river systems. Denali National Park and Preserve is located here, home to Mount McKinley (also widely known by its local name of Denali), the highest point in North America.  File:Grizzly Bear Fishing Brooks  bear fishing for salmon at Katmai National Park and  Falls. A sparsely inhabited region stretching some inland from the Bering Sea. Most of the population lives along the coast. Kodiak Island is also located in Southwest. The massive  Delta, one of the largest river deltas in the world, is here. Portions of the Alaska Peninsula are considered part of Southwest, with the remaining portions included with the Aleutian Islands (see below). ====North Slope==== The North Slope is mostly tundra peppered with small villages. The area is known for its massive reserves of crude oil, and contains both the National Petroleum  and the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field. Barrow, Alaska|Barrow, the northernmost city in the United States, is located here. The Northwest Arctic Borough,  Arctic area, anchored by Kotzebue,  and also containing the Kobuk River valley, is often regarded as being part of this region. However, the respective Inupiat people|Inupiat of the North Slope and of the Northwest Arctic seldom think of themselves as one. ====Aleutian Islands==== More than 300 small, volcanic islands make up this chain, which stretches over into the Pacific Ocean. The International Date Line was drawn west of 180° to keep the whole state, and thus the entire North American continent, within the same legal day. However, because some of these islands fall in the Eastern Hemisphere, this makes Alaska the northernmost, easternmost and westernmost state in the union, with the southernmost state being Hawaii. Two of the islands, Attu Island|Attu and Kiska, were occupied by Japanese forces during World War II. ===Natural features=== File:Augustine Volcano Jan 12 2006  Volcano erupting on January 12, 2006. With its myriad islands, Alaska has nearly of tidal shoreline. The Aleutian Islands chain extends west from the southern tip of the Alaska Peninsula. Many active volcanoes are found in the Aleutians and in coastal regions. Unimak Island, for example, is home to Mount Shishaldin, which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to above the North Pacific. It is the most perfect volcanic cone on Earth, even more symmetrical than Japan's Mount Fuji. The chain of volcanoes extends to Mount Spurr, west of Anchorage on the mainland. Geologists have identified Alaska as part of Wrangellia, a large region consisting of multiple states and Canadian provinces in the Pacific Northwest which is actively undergoing plate  building. One of the world's largest tides occurs in Turnagain Arm, just south of Anchorage – tidal differences can be more than . (Many sources say Turnagain has the  tides in North America, but several areas in Canada have larger tides.) Alaska has more than three million lakes. Marshlands and wetland permafrost cover (mostly in northern, western and southwest flatlands). Glacier ice covers some of land and of tidal zone. The Bering Glacier complex near the southeastern border with Yukon covers alone. With over 100,000, Alaska has half of the world's glaciers. ===Land ownership===  has more public land owned by the federal government than any other state. According to an October 1998 report by the United States Bureau of Land Management, approximately 65% of Alaska is owned and managed by the Federal government of the United States|U.S. federal government as public lands, including a multitude of United States National  forests, national parks, and national wildlife refuges. Of these, the Bureau of Land Management manages , or 23.8% of the state. The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. It is the world's largest wildlife refuge, comprising . Of the remaining land area, the state of Alaska owns ; its entitlement under the Alaska Statehood Act. A portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to organized boroughs, under the statutory provisions pertaining to newly formed boroughs. Smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other  opportunities, though these are infrequently popular due to the often remote and roadless locations. The University of Alaska, as a land grant university, also owns substantial acreage which it manages independently. Another are owned by 12 regional, and scores of local, Native corporations created under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act. Alaska Native Regional  Native corporation Doyon, Limited often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in Alaska in advertisements and other  Provisions of ANCSA allowing the corporations' land holdings to be sold on the open market starting in 1991 were repealed before they could take effect. Effectively, the corporations hold title (including subsurface title in many cases, a privilege denied to individual Alaskans) but cannot sell the land. Alaska Native Allotment Act|Individual Native allotments can be and are sold on the open market, however. Various private interests own the remaining land, totaling about one percent of the state. Alaska is, by a large margin, the state with the smallest percentage of private land ownership when Native corporation holdings are excluded. ===Climate=== The climate in Juneau and the southeast panhandle is a mid-latitude oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification "Cfb") in the southern sections and a subarctic oceanic climate (Köppen "Cfc") in the northern parts. On an annual basis, the panhandle is both the wettest and warmest part of Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year. Juneau averages over of precipitation a year. This is also the only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months. The climate of Anchorage and south central Alaska is mild by Alaskan standards due to the region's proximity to the seacoast. While the area gets less rain than southeast Alaska, it gets more snow, and days tend to be clearer. On average, Anchorage receives of precipitation a year, with around of snow, although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow. It is a subarctic climate (Köppen "Dfc") due to its brief, cool summers. File:Barrow  Alaska|Barrow, known colloquially for many years by the nickname "Top of the World", is the northernmost city in the United States. The climate of Western Alaska is determined in large part by the Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska. It is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north. The temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is. This region has a tremendous amount of variety in precipitation. An area stretching from the northern side of the Seward Peninsula to the Kobuk River valley is technically a desert, with portions receiving less than of precipitation annually. On the other extreme, some locations between Dilli
Agriculture	Agriculture also called farming or husbandry is the cultivation of animals, plants, fungi, and other life forms for food, fiber, biofuel and other products used to sustain life.  Agriculture was the key development in the rise of sedentary human civilization, whereby farming of  species created food economic  that nurtured the development of civilization. The study of agriculture is known as agricultural science. Agriculture generally speaking refers to human activities, although it is also observed in certain species of ant and termite. The history of agriculture dates back thousands of years, and its development has been driven and defined by greatly different climates, cultures, and technologies. However, all farming generally relies on techniques to expand and maintain the lands suitable for raising domesticated species. For plants, this usually requires some form of irrigation, although there are methods of dryland farming;  herding on rangeland is still the most common means of raising livestock. In the developed world, industrial agriculture based on large-scale monoculture has become the dominant system of modern farming, although there is growing support for sustainable agriculture (e.g. permaculture or organic agriculture). Modern agronomy, plant breeding, pesticides and fertilizers, and technological improvements have sharply increased yields from cultivation, but at the same time have caused widespread ecological damage and negative human health effects. Selective breeding and modern practices in animal husbandry such as intensive pig farming have similarly increased the output of meat, but have raised concerns about animal cruelty and the health effects of the antibiotics, growth hormones, and other chemicals commonly used in industrial meat production. The major agricultural products can be broadly grouped into foods, fibers, fuels, and raw materials. In the 21st century, plants have been used to grow biofuels,  bioplastics, and  Specific foods include cereals, vegetables, fruits, and meat. Fibers include cotton, wool, hemp, silk and flax. Raw materials include lumber and bamboo. Other useful materials are produced by plants, such as resins. Biofuels include methane from biomass, ethanol, and biodiesel.  flowers, nursery  plants, tropical fish and birds for the pet trade are some of the ornamental products. Regarding food production, the World Bank targets agricultural food production and water management as an increasingly global issue that is fostering an important and growing debate. In 2007, one third of the world's workers were employed in agriculture. The service  sector has overtaken agriculture as the economic sector employing the most people worldwide. Despite the size of its workforce, agricultural production accounts for less than five percent of the gross world product (an aggregate of all gross domestic products). == Etymology == The word "agriculture" is the English adaptation of Latin  from "ager", "a field",  Latin Word Lookup] and "cultūra",  in the strict sense of "tillage of the soil".  Latin Word Lookup] Thus, a literal reading of the word yields "tillage of a field / of fields". == Overview == File:Clark's Sector  Clark  Sector Model (1950): The percent of the human population working in primary sector activities such as agriculture has decreased over time. Agriculture has played a key role in the development of human civilization. Until the Industrial Revolution, the vast majority of the human population labored in agriculture. The type of agriculture they developed was typically subsistence agriculture in which farmers raised most of their crops for consumption on farm, and there was only a small portion left over for the payment of taxes, dues, or trade. In subsistence agriculture cropping decisions are made with an eye to what the family needs for food, and to make clothing, and not the world marketplace. Development of agricultural techniques has steadily increased agricultural productivity, and the widespread diffusion of these techniques during a time period is often called an   revolution. A remarkable shift in agricultural practices has occurred over the past century in response to new technologies, and the development of world markets. This also led to technological improvements in agricultural techniques, such as the Haber-Bosch method for synthesizing ammonium nitrate which made the traditional practice of recycling nutrients with crop rotation and animal manure less necessary. Synthetic nitrogen, along with mined rock phosphate, pesticides and mechanised  have greatly increased crop yields in the early 20th century. Increased supply of grains has led to cheaper livestock as well. Further, global yield increases were experienced later in the 20th century when high-yield varieties of common staple grains such as rice, wheat, and corn (maize) were introduced as a part of the Green Revolution. The Green Revolution exported the technologies (including pesticides and synthetic nitrogen) of the developed world to the developing world. Thomas Malthus famously predicted that the Earth would not be able to support its growing population, but technologies such as the Green Revolution have allowed the world to produce a surplus of food.  File:Norman  Borlaug, father of the Green Revolution, is often credited with saving over a billion people worldwide from starvation. Many governments have subsidized agriculture for a variety of political and economic reasons. These agricultural subsidies are often linked to the production of certain commodities such as wheat, corn (maize), rice, soybeans, and milk. These subsidies, especially when instituted by developed  countries have been noted as protectionist, inefficient, and  damaging. In the past century agriculture has been characterized by enhanced productivity, the use of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides, selective breeding, mechanised  water contamination, and farm subsidies. Proponents of organic farming such as Sir Albert Howard argued in the early 20th century that the overuse of pesticides and synthetic fertilizers damages the long-term fertility of the soil. While this feeling lay dormant for decades, as environmental awareness has increased in the 21st century there has been a movement towards sustainable agriculture by some farmers, consumers, and policymakers. In recent years there has been a backlash against perceived  environmental effects of mainstream agriculture, particularly regarding water pollution, The World Bank (1995),  Overcoming Agricultural Water Pollution in the European Union]. resulting in the organic movement. One of the major forces behind this movement has been the European Union, which first certified organic food in 1991 and began reform of its Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 2005 to phase out  farm subsidies, European Commission (2003),  CAP Reform]. also known as  The growth of organic farming has renewed research in alternative technologies such as integrated pest management and selective breeding. Recent mainstream technological developments include genetically modified food. In late 2007, several factors pushed up the price of grains consumed by humans as well as used to feed poultry and dairy cows and other cattle, causing higher prices of wheat (up 58%), soybean (up 32%), and maize (up 11%) over the year. Food riots took place in several countries across the world.  Watts, Jonathan (4 December 2007).  "Riots and hunger feared as demand for grain sends food costs soaring"], "The Guardian" (London).  Mortished, Carl (7 March  "Already we have riots, hoarding, panic: the sign of things to come?"], "The Times" (London).  Borger, Julian (26 February 2008).  "Feed the world? We are fighting a losing battle, UN admits"], "The Guardian" (London). Contributing factors included drought in Australia and elsewhere, increasing demand for grain-fed animal products from the growing middle classes of countries such as China and India, diversion of foodgrain to biofuel production and trade restrictions imposed by several countries. An epidemic of stem rust on wheat caused by race Ug99 is currently spreading across Africa and into Asia and is causing major concern. McKie, Robin; Rice, Xan (22 April 2007).  "Millions face famine as crop disease rages"], "The Observer' (London). name =  Leonard, K.J.  Black stem rust biology and threat to wheat growers]", USDA ARS Approximately 40% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded. Sample, Ian (31 August 2007).  "Global food crisis looms as climate change and population growth strip fertile land"], "The Guardian" (London). In Africa, if current trends of soil degradation continue, the continent might be able to feed just 25% of its population by 2025, according to United Nations  Ghana-based Institute for Natural Resources in Africa.  "Africa may be able to feed only 25% of its population by 2025"],  14 December 2006. == History ==  Sumerian harvester's sickle made from baked clay (ca. 3000 BC). Agricultural practices such as irrigation, crop rotation, fertilizers, and pesticides were developed long ago, but have made great strides in the past century. The history of agriculture has played a major role in history of the world|human history, as agricultural progress has been a crucial factor in worldwide social  change. Division of labor in agricultural societies made commonplace  rarely seen in  cultures. So, too, are arts such as epic literature and monumental architecture, as well as codified legal systems. When farmers became capable of producing food beyond the needs of their own families, others in their society were freed to devote themselves to projects other than food acquisition. Historians and  have long argued that the development of agriculture made civilization possible. The total world population probably never exceeded 15 million inhabitants before the invention of agriculture. Luc-Normand Tellier (2009).  Urban world history: an economic and geographical  PUQ. p.26. ISBN 2-7605-1588-5 === Prehistoric origins === Forest gardening, a plant-based food production system, is thought to be the world's oldest known form of agriculture. Forest gardens originated in  times along jungle-clad river banks and in the wet foothills of monsoon regions. In the gradual process of a family improving their immediate environment, useful tree and vine species were identified, protected and improved whilst undesirable species were eliminated. Eventually superior foreign species were selected and incorporated into the family's garden. === Ancient history === The Fertile Crescent of Western Asia,  and India were sites of the earliest planned sowing and harvesting of plants that had previously been gathered in the wild. Independent development of agriculture occurred in northern and southern China, Africa's Sahel, New Guinea and several regions of the Americas. In particular,  the history of maize cultivation in southern Mexico dates back 9000 years.] "New York Times",  The eight so-called Neolithic founder crops of agriculture appear: first emmer wheat and einkorn wheat, then hulled barley, peas, lentils, Vicia ervilia|bitter vetch, chick peas and flax. By 7000 BC,  agriculture reached Egypt. From at least 7000 BC the Indian subcontinent saw farming of wheat and barley, as attested by archaeological excavation at Mehrgarh in Balochistan  in what is present day Pakistan. By 6000 BC, mid-scale farming was entrenched on the banks of the Nile River|Nile. This, as irrigation had not yet matured sufficiently. About this time, agriculture was developed independently in the Far East, with rice, rather than wheat, as the primary crop. Chinese and Indonesian farmers went on to domesticate taro and beans including mung bean|mung, soy and azuki. To complement these new sources of carbohydrates, highly organized net fishing of rivers, lakes and ocean shores in these areas brought in great volumes of essential protein. Collectivel
Aldous Huxley	Aldous Leonard Huxley (26 July 1894 – 22 November 1963) was an English writer and one of the most prominent members of the famous Huxley family. Best known for his novels including "Brave New World" and a wide-ranging output of essays, Huxley also edited the magazine "Oxford Poetry", and published short stories, poetry, travel writing, film stories and scripts. Huxley spent the later part of his life in the United States, living in Los Angeles from 1937 until his death. Aldous Huxley was a  pacifist, and  and he was latterly interested in spiritual subjects such as parapsychology and philosophical mysticism. David King Dunaway (1998)  Aldous Huxley recollected: an oral history] p.90. Rowman Altamira, 1998 He is also well known for advocating and taking Psychedelic  By the end of his life Huxley was widely recognized to be one of the pre-eminent intellectuals of his time and respected as an important researcher into visual communication and sight-related theories as well. == Early life == Aldous Huxley was born in Godalming, Surrey, UK, in 1894. He was the third son of the writer and schoolmaster Leonard Huxley  Huxley and his first wife, Julia Arnold, who founded Prior's Field School. Julia was the niece of poet and critic Matthew Arnold and the sister of Mary Augusta Ward|Mrs. Humphrey Ward. Aldous was the grandson of Thomas Henry Huxley, the zoologist, agnostic and  ("Darwin's Bulldog"). His brother Julian Huxley and half-brother Andrew Huxley also became outstanding biologists. Aldous had another brother, Noel Trevelyan (1891–1914), who committed suicide after a period of Major depressive  depression. Holmes, Charles Mason (1978) "Aldous Huxley and the Way to Reality." Greenwood Press, 1978, p. 5 Huxley began his learning in his father's well-equipped botanical laboratory, then continued in a school named Hillside. His teacher was his mother, who supervised him for several years until she became terminally ill. After Hillside, he was educated at Eton College. Huxley's mother died in 1908 when he was 14. In 1911, he suffered an illness  punctata) which "left [him] practically blind for two to three years". Aldous' near-blindness disqualified him from service in the First World War. Once his eyesight recovered sufficiently, he was able to study English literature at Balliol College, Oxford|Balliol College, Oxford. In 1916 he edited "Oxford Poetry" and later graduated (B.A.) with first class honours. His brother Julian wrote,  I believe his blindness was a blessing in disguise. For one thing, it put paid to his idea of taking up medicine as a career ... His uniqueness lay in his universalism. He was able to take all knowledge for his province. Julian Huxley 1965. "Aldous Huxley 1894–1963: a Memorial Volume". Chatto & Windus, London. p. 22  Following his education at Balliol, Huxley was financially indebted to his father and had to earn a living. He taught French for a year at Eton College|Eton, where Eric Blair (later to become George Orwell) and Stephen Runciman were among his pupils, but was remembered as an incompetent and hopeless teacher who couldn’t keep discipline. Nevertheless, Blair and others were impressed by his use of words.  For a short while in 1918, he was employed acquiring provisions at the Air Ministry. Significantly, Huxley also worked for a time in the 1920s at the  advanced Brunner Mond|Brunner and Mond chemical plant in Billingham, Teesside, and the most recent introduction to his famous science fiction novel "Brave New World" (1932) states that this experience of "an ordered universe in a world of planless incoherence" was one source for the novel. Baggini, Julian (2009)  Atheism, A Brief insight]" Sterling Publishing Company, Inc., 2009 <div  {| align="center"  margin:0em; border:1px solid #E9E9E9" !  font-size:95%; border:1px solid #aaaaaa; padding: 0 5px 0 5px;" | Huxley-Arnold Family Tree (partial) |- |  | |}  ==Career== Huxley completed his first (unpublished) novel at the age of 17 and began writing seriously in his early 20s. His first published novels were social satires, beginning with "Crome Yellow" (1921). === Bloomsbury set ===  to right: Bloomsbury Group members – Lady Ottoline Morrell, Maria Nys, Lytton Strachey, Duncan Grant, and Vanessa Bell. During the First World War, Huxley spent much of his time at Garsington Manor, home of Lady Ottoline Morrell, working as a farm labourer. Here he met several Bloomsbury  figures including Bertrand Russell and Clive Bell. Later, in "Crome Yellow" (1921) he caricatured the Garsington lifestyle. In 1919 he married Maria Nys, a Belgian woman he met at Garsington; they had one son. The family lived in Italy part of the time in the 1920s, where Huxley would visit his friend D. H. Lawrence. Following Lawrence's death in 1930, Huxley edited Lawrence's letters (1933). Works of this period included important novels on the dehumanising aspects of scientific progress, most famously "Brave New World", and on pacifist themes (for example, "Eyeless in Gaza"). In "Brave New World" Huxley portrays a society operating on the principles of mass production and Pavlovian conditioning. Huxley was strongly influenced by F.M. Alexander|F. Matthias Alexander and included him as a character in "Eyeless in Gaza". Starting from this period, Huxley began to write and edit non-fiction works on pacifist issues, including "Ends and Means", "An Encyclopedia of Pacifism", and "Pacifism and Philosophy", and was an active member of the Peace Pledge Union. === The U.S. === In 1937, Huxley moved to Hollywood, with his wife Maria, son Matthew, and friend Gerald Heard. He lived in the U.S., mainly in southern California, until his death, but also for a time in Taos, New Mexico, where he wrote "Ends and Means" (published in 1937). In this work he examines the fact that although most people in modern civilisation agree that they want a world of "liberty, peace, justice, and brotherly love", they have not been able to agree on how to achieve it. Heard introduced Huxley to Vedanta  philosophy), meditation, and vegetarianism through the principle of ahimsa. In 1938 Huxley befriended J. Krishnamurti, whose teachings he greatly admired. He also became a Vedantist in the circle of Hindu Swami Swami  and introduced Christopher Isherwood to this circle. Not long after, Huxley wrote his book on widely held spiritual values and ideas, "The Perennial Philosophy", which discussed the teachings of renowned mystics of the world. Huxley's book affirmed a sensibility that insists there are realities beyond the generally accepted "five senses" and that there is genuine meaning for humans beyond both sensual satisfactions and  Huxley became a close friend of Remsen Bird, president of Occidental College. He spent much time at the college, which is in the Eagle Rock, Los Angeles|Eagle Rock neighbourhood of Los Angeles. The college appears as "Tarzana College" in his satirical novel "After Many a Summer" (1939). The novel won Huxley that year's James Tait Black Memorial Prize for fiction. Haugrud Reiff, Raychel (2003) "Aldous Huxley: Brave New World" p.103. Marshall Cavendish, 2009 Huxley also incorporated Bird into the novel. During this period Huxley earned some Hollywood income as a writer. In March 1938, his friend Anita Loos, a novelist and screenwriter, put him in touch with  who hired Huxley for "Madame Curie (1943 film)|Madame Curie" which was originally to star Greta Garbo and be directed by George Cukor. (The film was eventually completed by MGM in 1943 with a different director and cast.) Huxley received screen credit for "Pride and Prejudice (1940 film)|Pride and Prejudice" (1940) and was paid for his work on a number of other films, including "Jane Eyre (1944 film)|Jane Eyre" (1944). However, his experience in Hollywood was not a success. When he wrote a synopsis of "Alice in Wonderland (1951 film)|Alice in Wonderland", Walt Disney rejected it on the grounds that "he could only understand every third word". name="The Huxleys p.  Huxley's leisurely development of ideas, it seemed, was not suitable for the movie moguls, who demanded fast, dynamic dialogue above all else. For Dick Huemer, during the 1940s, Huxley went to the first of a five meetings' session to elaborate the script of "Alice in Wonderland" but never came again. name="Mouse Under Glass  David Koenig, "Mouse Under Glass", p.82 For author John Grant, although the movie's character the Caterpillar displays some  familiar from Huxley's discussion of his experiments with hallucinogens, Huxley's contribution to the movie is nonexistent. name="Animated Characters  John Grant, "The Encyclopedia of Walt Disney's Animated Characters", p.233. On 21 October 1949, Huxley wrote to George Orwell, author of "Nineteen Eighty-Four", congratulating him on "how fine and how profoundly important the book is". In his letter to Orwell, he predicted:  Within the next generation I believe that the world's leaders will discover that infant conditioning and narco-hypnosis are more efficient, as instruments of government, than clubs and prisons, and that the lust for power can be just as completely satisfied by suggesting people into loving their servitude as by flogging them and kicking them into obedience.   === Post World War II === After the Second World War, Huxley applied for United States citizenship. His application was continuously deferred on the grounds that he would not say he would take up arms to defend the U.S. He claimed a philosophical, rather than a religious objection, and therefore was not exempt under the McCarran Act. He withdrew his application. Nevertheless, he remained in the country; and in 1959 he turned down an offer of a Knight Bachelor by the Harold  Minister  government. During the 1950s Huxley's interest in the field of psychical research grew keener, and his later works are strongly influenced by both mysticism and his experiences with psychedelic drugs. In October 1930, the English occultist Aleister Crowley dined with Huxley in Berlin, and to this day rumours persist that Crowley introduced Huxley to peyote on that occasion. He was introduced to mescaline (the key active ingredient of peyote) by the psychiatrist Humphry Osmond in 1953. Martin, Douglas. Friday, 22 August 2008 "Humphry Osmond, 86, Who Sought Medicinal Value in Psychedelic Drugs, Dies". New York: "New York Times" Through Dr. Osmond, Huxley met millionaire Alfred Matthew Hubbard who would deal with LSD on a wholesale basis. |year=1998  Press |quote=All sorts of crazy things started happening... }} On 24 December 1955, Huxley took his first dose of LSD. Indeed, Huxley was a pioneer of self-directed psychedelic drug use "in a search for  famously taking 100 micrograms of LSD as he lay dying. His psychedelic drug experiences are described in the essays "The Doors of Perception" (the title deriving from some lines in the book "The Marriage of Heaven and Hell" by William Blake), and "Heaven and Hell (essay)|Heaven and Hell". Some of his writings on psychedelics became frequent reading among early hippies. While living in Los Angeles, Huxley was a friend of Ray Bradbury. According to Sam Weller's biography of Bradbury, the latter was dissatisfied with Huxley, especially after Huxley encouraged Bradbury to take psychedelic drugs. == Association with Vedanta == Beginning in 1939 and continuing until his death in 1963, Huxley had an extensive association with the Vedanta Society of Southern California, founded and headed by Swami Prabhavananda. Together with Gerald Heard, Christopher Isherwood, and other followers he was initiated by the Swami and was taught meditation and spiritual practices. In 1944 Huxley wrote the introduction to the "Bhagavad Gita: The Song of God",   translated by Swami Prabhavanada and Christopher Isherwood, which was published by The Vedanta Society of Southern California. From 1941 through 1960 Huxley contributed 48 articles to "Vedanta and the West", published by the Society. He als
Ada	Ada , ADA , or A.D.A. may refer to: ==Food== * Ada (food)|Ada ==People== <!-- people without a surname, who are possibly referred to as just "Ada"  * Ada (name), a feminine given name (and list of people with the name) * St. Ada, a 7th-century French abbess * Ada, Countess of Atholl (died 1264) * Ada, Countess of Holland * Ada de Warenne, Countess of Northumbria and Huntingdon (died 1178) * Ada of Caria, satrap deposed by her brother Idrieus and restored by Alexander the Great * Ada, sister of Charlemagne, for whom the Ada Gospels at Trier were produced * Ada Lovelace (1815–1852), the first computer programmer * Ada Yonath (born 1939), Israeli biochemist ==Places== ;Croatia * Ada, Croatia, village in Croatia, municipality Šodolovci, Vukovar-Syrmia County ;Ghana * Ada, Ghana, or Ada Foah * Ada (Ghana parliament constituency) ;Nigeria * Ada, Delta, Isoka town in Delta State ;New Zealand * Ada River, South Island ;Serbia * Ada (Serbia), town and municipality ;Tanzania * Ada Estate, luxury residential suburb of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania ;United States * Ada, Alabama, an unincorporated community in Montgomery County, Alabama * Ada County, Idaho * Ada Township, Dickey County, North Dakota * Ada Township, Michigan, Kent County, Michigan * Ada Township, Perkins County, South Dakota, Perkins County, South Dakota * Ada, Minnesota, Norman County, Minnesota * Ada, Ohio, Hardin County, Ohio * Ada, Oklahoma, Pontotoc County, Oklahoma * Ada, Oregon, Lane County, Oregon * Ada, West Virginia, Mercer County, West Virginia * Ada, Wisconsin, Sheboygan County, Wisconsin ==Literature, film, music, and the arts== * "Ada or Ardor: A Family Chronicle", a 1969 novel by Vladimir Nabokov * Alternative Distribution Alliance, a music distributor owned by Warner Music Group ; Television and film * Ada TV, broadcasts in both satellite and terrestrial in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus * Ada (film)|"Ada" (film), a 1961 film by Daniel Mann * "ADA...A Way of Life", a 2008 Bollywood musical by Tanvir Ahmed * Ada (dog actor), a dog that played Colin on the sitcom "Spaced" ; Video games * Ada   a character in "Castlevania: Legacy of Darkness" * Ada Wong, a character in the "Resident Evil" franchise * ADA, a character in List of Zone of the Enders  of the Enders" ==Politics and government== * Aeronautical Development Agency, an agency of India's Ministry of Defence * Air Defense Artillery Branch (United States Army) * Amazon Development Agency, a development agency in Brazil * American Decency Association, an American political organization advocating against pornography and "indecent" media * Americans for Democratic Action, an American liberal political advocacy organization * Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, a U.S. law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability * Amigos dos Amigos, a drug cartel in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro * "Angehöriger der Armee", or AdA, a  of the Swiss Armed Forces *  Act, a U.S. law that prohibits the federal government from incurring debts not authorized by Congress * Anti-Dumping Agreement, a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) about  dumping (pricing  pricing practices * Assistant District Attorney, a US government attorney position * Austrian Development Agency, a List of development aid  aid agency * Australian Digital Alliance, a copyright advocacy group * Association of Drainage Authorities, a membership body for those involved in water level management in the United Kingdom ==Science and engineering== * ADA collider, the first  collider *   converter, seen as ADA or A/DA, a conversion occurring in some electronic devices, often musical * Adangme language's ISO 639-2 code * Advanced Distribution Automation, the extension of intelligent control over an electrical power grid * After the Development of Agriculture, A.D.A., a system of counting years, like Anno Domini|A.D. and Anno Mundi|A.M. * Ada (food), an Indian food made with rice, coconut powder mix, and sugar * Ada (ship), wooden Ketch, wrecked near Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia * USS Little Ada (1864), steamer captured by the Union Navy during the American Civil War ; Astronomy *523 Ada, minor planet orbiting the Sun ; Biology * Ada (orchid), a genus of orchids * "Ada aurantiaca", species of orchid and the type species of its genus * "Ada keiliana", species of orchid ; Computer science * Ada (programming language), a programming language based on Pascal * Ada (computer virus) * Apple Design Awards ; Enzymes, etc. * Adenosine deaminase, an enzyme involved in purine metabolism * Ada (protein), an enzyme induced by treatment of bacterial cells * Ada regulon, one of the Escherichia coli adaptive response proteins ; Meteorology * Cyclone Ada  two tropical cyclones named Ada ; Scientific and medical organizations * AdA (physics) or Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (National Institute for Nuclear Physics), Italy * American Dental Association * American Diabetes Association * American Dietetic Association * American Dyslexia Association ; Air travel * Ada Air, regional airline based in Tirana, Albania * Ada International Airport or Saipan International Airport, Saipan Island, Northern Mariana Islands * Aerolínea de Antioquia, a Colombian Airline * Airline Deregulation Act, a 1978 US bill removing governmental control from commercial aviation * Adana Şakirpaşa Airport's IATA code ==See also== * Adah  * Adha  bs:Ada (čvor) ca:Ada da:Ada de:ADA et:Ada es:Ada eo:ADA fr:Ada gl:Ada hr:Ada id:Ada it:ADA he:עדה lt:Ada (reikšmės) hu:Ada  lap) nl:Ada ja:ADA nn:Ada pl:Ada pt:ADA ru:Ада sk:Ada sr:Ада sh:Ada fi:Ada sv:Ada tr:Ada (anlam ayrımı) vi:Ada (định hướng) vo:Ada
Aberdeen (disambiguation)	Aberdeen is a city in Scotland, United Kingdom. Aberdeen may also refer to: == Aberdeen, Scotland == Aberdeen, Scotland, is home of: * Aberdeen (HM Prison) * Aberdeen F.C. * Aberdeen railway station * University of Aberdeen ==Africa== ;Sierra Leone * Aberdeen, Sierra Leone ;South Africa * Aberdeen, Eastern Cape ==Asia== ;Hong Kong * Aberdeen, Hong Kong ;Sri Lanka * Aberdeen, Sri Lanka ==Australia== * Aberdeen, New South Wales ** Aberdeen railway station, New South Wales * Aberdeen, Tasmania, place with a Scottish place names in  placename in Tasmania, Australia ==Europe== * Aberdeen (UK Parliament constituency) 1832-1885 * Aberdeen Burghs (UK Parliament constituency) 1801-1832 * Aberdeen Central (Scottish Parliament constituency) * Aberdeen Central (UK Parliament constituency) ==North America== ;Canada * Aberdeen, Kamloops, an area in the City of Kamloops, British Columbia * Aberdeen, Abbotsford, a neighbourhood in the City of Abbotsford, British Columbia * Aberdeen Parish, New Brunswick * Aberdeen, Nova Scotia, part of the Municipality of Inverness County, Nova Scotia * Aberdeen, Grey County, Ontario * Aberdeen, Saskatchewan * Aberdeen No. 373, Saskatchewan * Aberdeen, community in the township of Champlain,  Prescott and Russell County, Ontario * Aberdeen Township, Quebec, until 1960 part of  now part of  Quebec ;United States of America * Aberdeen, Arkansas, List of places in Arkansas: A|place in Arkansas * Aberdeen, California * Aberdeen, Florida * Aberdeen, Georgia, List of places in Georgia (U.S. state): A-D|place in Georgia * Aberdeen, Idaho * Aberdeen, Indiana, in Ohio County, Indiana|Ohio County * Aberdeen, Maryland ** Aberdeen (Amtrak station) ** Aberdeen IronBirds, baseball team * Aberdeen, Mississippi * Aberdeen, Montana, place near Interstate 90 in Montana * Aberdeen Township, New Jersey * Aberdeen, North Carolina * Aberdeen, Ohio * Aberdeen, Pennsylvania, List of places in Pennsylvania: A|place in Pennsylvania * Aberdeen, South Dakota * Aberdeen, Washington * Aberdeen, West Virginia ==Other== * Some members of the Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair house * Aberdeen (band), an American rock band * Aberdeen City (band), Boston based  rock band. * Aberdeen (film), a film (2000) directed by Hans Petter Moland, starring Stellan Skarsgård and Lena Headey * Aberdeen Asset Management, an investment management group * Aberdeen Station (TransLink), SkyTrain station on the Canada Line in Richmond, British Columbia, Canada * Aberdeen Group, an IT-consulting firm * Aberdeen LLC, a List of NAS  and storage server computer system manufacturer * Aberdeen (song) A song by alternative rock band Cage The Elephant ==See also== *Aberdeen City  af:Aberdeen (dubbelsinnig)   ca:Aberdeen  cs:Aberdeen de:Aberdeen  et:Aberdeen (täpsustus) es:Aberdeen  eo:Aberdeno   fr:Aberdeen (homonymie) gl:Aberdeen ko:애버딘 (동음이의) it:Aberdeen (disambigua)     lb:Aberdeen (Homonymie) lmo:Aberdeen   nl:Aberdeen    pl:Aberdeen  pt:Aberdeen   sk:Aberdeen fi:Aberdeen  sv:Aberdeen (olika betydelser) vi:Aberdeen vo:Aberdeen  (搞清楚)
Algae	 lineage of algae according to Thomas  The exact number and placement of Endosymbiotic  events is currently unknown, so this diagram can be taken only as a general guide   It represents the most parsimonious way of explaining the three types of endosymbiotic origins of plastids. These types include the endosymbiotic events of cyanobacteria, red algae and green algae, leading to the hypothesis of the supergroups  Chromalveolata and Cabozoa respectively. However, the monophyly of Cabozoa has been refuted and the monophylies of Archaeplastida and Chromalveolata are currently strongly challenged. Endosymbiotic events are noted by dotted lines. Algae ( or ; singular "alga" , Latin language|Latin for "seaweed") are a very large and diverse group of simple, typically autotrophic organisms, ranging from unicellular to multicellular forms, such as the Macrocystis pyrifera|giant kelps that grow to 65 meters in length. They are  like plants, and "simple" because their tissues are not organized into the many distinct organs found in  plants. The largest and most complex marine forms are called seaweeds. Though the  cyanobacteria (commonly referred to as blue-green algae) were traditionally included as "algae" in older textbooks, many modern sources regard this as outdated  as they are now considered to be bacteria. Ed. Guiry, M.D., John, D.M., Rindi, F and McCarthy, T.K. 2007. "New Survey of Clare Island Volume 6: The Freshwater and Terrestrial Algae." Royal Irish Academy. ISBN  The term "algae" is now restricted to  organisms. name="Allaby  All true algae therefore have a Cell  enclosed within a cell  and plastids bound in one or more membranes.  name="Round  Round (1981) Algae constitute a paraphyletic and polyphyletic group,  as they do not include all the descendants of the last universal ancestor nor do they all descend from a common algal ancestor, although their plastids seem to have a single origin.  Diatoms are also examples of algae. Blue-green algae are found in the fossil record dating back to approximately 3 billion years in the Precambrian. Algae exhibit a wide range of reproductive strategies, from simple, asexual cell division to complex forms of sexual reproduction. Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History; Department of Botany.  Algae lack the various structures that characterize land plants, such as phyllids (leaves) and rhizoids in nonvascular plants, or leaf|leaves, roots, and other Organ  that are found in tracheophytes (vascular plants). Many are  although some groups contain members that are mixotrophic, deriving energy both from photosynthesis and uptake of organic carbon either by osmotrophy,  or  Some unicellular species rely entirely on external energy sources and have limited or no photosynthetic apparatus. Nearly all algae have photosynthetic machinery ultimately derived from cyanobacteria, and so produce oxygen as a by-product of  unlike other photosynthetic bacteria such as Purple sulfur  and green sulfur bacteria. Fossilized filamentous algae from the Vindhya basin have been dated back to 1.6 to 1.7 billion years ago. ==Etymology and study== File:Gmelin - Historia Fucorum  page of Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin, "Historia Fucorum", dated 1768. The singular "alga" is the Latin word for a particular seaweed and retains that meaning in English. The etymology is obscure. Although some speculate that it is related to Latin "algēre", "be cold", there is no known reason to associate seaweed with temperature. A more likely source is "alliga", "binding, entwining." Since Algae has become a biological  alga can also mean one classification under Algae, parallel to a fungus being a species of fungi, a plant being a species of plant, and so on. The ancient Greek word for seaweed was "φῦκος" (fūkos or phykos), which could mean either the seaweed, probably Red Algae, or a red dye derived from it. The Latinization, "fūcus", meant primarily the cosmetic rouge. The etymology is uncertain, but a strong candidate has long been some word related to the Biblical "פוך" (pūk), "paint" (if not that word itself), a cosmetic eye-shadow used by the ancient Egyptians and other inhabitants of the eastern Mediterranean. It could be any color: black, red, green, blue.  Downloadable Google Books]. Accordingly the modern study of marine and freshwater algae is called either phycology or algology. The name Fucus appears in a number of taxon|taxa.   oceanica  Scanning electron micrograph of the unicellular  "Gephyrocapsa oceanica". While  have been traditionally included among the Algae, recent works usually exclude them due to large differences such as the lack of membrane-bound organelles, the presence of a single circular chromosome, the presence of peptidoglycan in the cell walls, and ribosomes different in size and content from those of the Eukaryotes.  Rather than in chloroplasts, they conduct photosynthesis on specialized infolded cytoplasmic membranes called thylakoid membranes. Therefore, they differ significantly from the Algae despite occupying similar ecological niches. By modern definitions Algae are Eukaryotes and conduct photosynthesis within membrane-bound organelles called chloroplasts. Chloroplasts contain circular DNA and are similar in structure to Cyanobacteria, presumably representing reduced cyanobacterial endosymbiotic  The exact nature of the chloroplasts is different among the different lines of Algae, reflecting different endosymbiotic events. The table below describes the composition of the three major groups of Algae. Their lineage relationships are shown in the figure in the upper right. Many of these groups contain some members that are no longer  Some retain plastids, but not chloroplasts, while others have lost plastids entirely. Phylogeny based on plastid  not  genealogy: |2=  }} }} }} }} }} {|  |- ! Supergroup affiliation !! Members !! Endosymbiont !! Summary |- |Primoplantae/  Archaeplastida | * Chlorophyta * Rhodophyta * Glaucophyta |Cyanobacteria |These Algae have "primary" chloroplasts, i.e. the chloroplasts are surrounded by "two membranes" and probably developed through a single endosymbiotic event. The chloroplasts of Red Algae have chlorophylls "a" and "c" (often), and phycobilins, while those of Green Algae have chloroplasts with chlorophyll "a" and "b". Higher plants are pigmented similarly to Green Algae and probably developed from them, and thus Chlorophyta is a sister taxon to the plants; sometimes they are grouped as Viridiplantae. |- | Excavata and Rhizaria | *  * Euglenids |Green Algae | These groups have green chloroplasts containing chlorophylls "a" and "b".  Their chloroplasts are surrounded by "four and three membranes", respectively, and were probably retained from ingested Green Algae.  , which belong to the phylum Cercozoa, contain a small nucleomorph, which is a relict of the algae's cell  Euglenids , which belong to the phylum Euglenozoa, live primarily in freshwater and have chloroplasts with only three membranes. It has been suggested that the endosymbiotic Green Algae were acquired through myzocytosis rather than phagocytosis. |- |Chromista and Alveolata | * Heterokonts * Haptophyta * Cryptomonads *  |Red Algae | These groups have chloroplasts containing chlorophylls "a" and "c", and  shape varies from plant to plant. they may be of discoid, plate-like, reticulate, cup-shaped, spiral or ribbon shaped. They have one or more pyrenoids to preserve protein and starch. The latter chlorophyll type is not known from any prokaryotes or primary chloroplasts, but genetic similarities with the Red Algae suggest a relationship there. In the first three of these groups ( Chromista ), the chloroplast has four membranes, retaining a nucleomorph in Cryptomonads, and they likely share a common pigmented ancestor, although other evidence casts doubt on whether the Heterokonts, Haptophyta, and Cryptomonads are in fact more closely related to each other than to other groups.  The typical dinoflagellate chloroplast has three membranes, but there is considerable diversity in chloroplasts within the group, and it appears there were a number of endosymbiotic events.  The Apicomplexa, a group of closely related parasites, also have plastids called apicoplasts. Apicoplasts are not photosynthetic but appear to have a common origin with  chloroplasts.  |} W.H.Harvey (1811—1866) was the first to divide the Algae into four divisions based on their pigmentation. This is the first use of a biochemical criterion in plant systematics. Harvey's four divisions are: Red Algae (Rhodophyta), Brown Algae  Green Algae (Chlorophyta) and Diatomaceae. name="Dixon  ==Relationship to higher plants== The first plants on earth probably evolved from shallow freshwater algae much like "Chara" some 400 million years ago. These probably had an isomorphic alternation of generations and were probably filamentous. Fossils of isolated land plant spores suggest land plants may have been around as long as 475 million years ago.  ==Morphology==  kelp forest exhibit at the Monterey Bay Aquarium. A  multicellular thallus. A range of algal Morphology  are exhibited, and Convergent  of features in unrelated groups is common. The only groups to exhibit three dimensional multicellular Thallus|thalli are the Red algae|reds and Brown algae|browns, and some   Apical growth is constrained to subsets of these groups: the  reds, various browns, and the charophytes.  The form of  is quite different to those of reds and browns, because have distinct nodes, separated by internode 'stems'; whorls of branches reminiscent of the horsetails occur at the nodes.  Conceptacles are another polyphyletic trait; they appear in the coralline algae and the  as well as the browns.  Most of the simpler algae are unicellular flagellates or amoeboids, but colonial and non-motile forms have developed independently among several of the groups. Some of the more common organizational levels, more than one of which may occur in the biological life cycle|life cycle of a species, are * "Colonial": small, regular groups of motile cells * "Capsoid": individual non-motile cells embedded in mucilage * "Coccoid": individual non-motile cells with cell walls * "Palmelloid": non-motile cells embedded in mucilage * "Filamentous": a string of non-motile cells connected together, sometimes branching *  cells forming a thallus  with partial  of tissues In three lines even higher levels of organization have been reached, with full tissue  These are the brown algae, —some of which may reach 50 m in length (kelps) name="Thomas  —the red algae, and the green algae.  Introduction to the Green Algae <!-- Bot generated title  ] The most complex forms are found among the green algae (see Charales and Charophyta), in a lineage that eventually led to the higher land plants. The point where these non-algal plants begin and algae stop is usually taken to be the presence of reproductive organs with protective cell layers, a characteristic not found in the other alga groups. ==Symbiotic algae== Some species of algae form  relationships with other organisms. In these symbioses, the algae supply photosynthates (organic substances) to the host organism providing protection to the algal cells. The host organism derives some or all of its energy requirements from the algae. Examples are as follows. ===Lichens=== File:Lichens near Clogher Head  lichens in  are defined by the International Association for Lichenology to be "an association of a fungus and a photosynthetic symbiont resulting in a stable vegetative body having a specific structure." The fungi, or mycobionts, are from the Ascomycota with a few from the Basidiomycota. They are not found alone in nature but when they began to associate is not known. One mycobiont associates with the same phycobiont species, rarely two, from the Green Algae, except that alternatively the mycobiont may associate with the same species of Cyanobacteria (hence "photobiont" is the more accurate t
Analysis of variance	In statistics, analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) is a collection of statistical models, and their associated procedures, in which the observed variance in a particular variable is partitioned into components attributable to different sources of variation. In its simplest form, ANOVA provides a statistical test of whether or not the means of several groups are all equal, and therefore generalizes Student's  two-sample  to more than two groups. Doing multiple two-sample t-tests would result in an increased chance of committing a type I error. For this reason, ANOVAs are useful in comparing two, three, or more means. ==Background and terminology== ANOVA is a particular form of statistical hypothesis testing heavily used in the analysis of experimental data. A statistical hypothesis test is a method of making decisions using data. A test result (calculated from the null hypothesis and the sample) is called statistically significant if it is unlikely to have occurred by chance alone. A statistically significant result justifies the rejection of the null hypothesis. The terminology of ANOVA is largely from the statistical design of experiments. The experimenter adjusts factors and measures responses in an attempt to determine an effect. Factors are assigned to experimental units by a combination of randomization and blocking to ensure the validity of the results. Blinding keeps the weighing impartial. Responses show a variability that is partially the result of the effect and is partially random error. ANOVA is the synthesis of several ideas and it is used for multiple purposes. As a consequence, it is difficult to define concisely or precisely. "Classical ANOVA for balanced data does three things at once: # As exploratory data analysis, an ANOVA is an organization of an additive data decomposition, and its sums of squares indicate the variance of each component of the decomposition (or, equivalently, each set of terms of a linear model). # Comparisons of mean squares, along with F-tests ... allow testing of a nested sequence of models. # Closely related to the ANOVA is a linear model fit with coefficient estimates and standard errors." Gelman (2005 p 2) In short, ANOVA is a statistical tool used in several ways to develop and confirm an explanation for the observed data. Additionally: # <li  It is  elegant and relatively robust against violations to its assumptions. # ANOVA provides industrial strength (multiple sample comparison) statistical analysis. # It has been adapted to the analysis of a variety of experimental designs. As a result: ANOVA "has long enjoyed the status of being the most used (some would say abused) statistical technique in psychological research." Howell (2002 p 320) ANOVA "is probably the most useful technique in the field of statistical inference." Montgomery (2001 p 63) ANOVA is notoriously difficult to teach, particularly for complex experiments. Gelman (2005 p 1) In some cases the proper application of the method is best determined by problem pattern recognition followed by the consultation of a classic authoritative text. Gelman (2005 p 5) ===Hypothesis testing terms=== ; Statistical hypothesis : A statement about the parameters describing a population (not a sample). ; Statistic : A value calculated from a sample, often to summarize the sample for comparison purposes. ; Null hypothesis : A simple hypothesis associated with a contradiction to a theory one would like to prove. ; Alternate hypothesis : A hypothesis (often composite) associated with a theory one would like to prove. ; Statistical test : A decision function that takes its values in the set of hypotheses. ; statistical power|Power of a test (1 &minus; "β"): The test's probability of correctly rejecting the null hypothesis. The complement of the false negative rate, "β". ; Size / Significance level of a test ("α"): For simple hypotheses, this is the test's probability of "incorrectly" rejecting the null hypothesis. The false positive rate. ; p-value: The probability, assuming the null hypothesis is true, of observing a result at least as extreme as the test statistic. ; Statistical significance test : A predecessor to the statistical hypothesis test. An experimental result was said to be statistically significant if a sample was sufficiently inconsistent with the (null) hypothesis. The statistical hypothesis test added mathematical rigor and philosophical consistency to the concept by making the alternative hypothesis explicit. ; Type I error : Rejecting the null hypothesis when it is true - a false positive. ; Type II error : Failing to reject the null hypothesis when it is false - a false negative. ===Design of experiments terms=== (Condensed from the NIST Engineering Statistics handbook: Section 5.7. A Glossary of DOE Terminology.) ; Analysis of Variance (ANOVA): A mathematical process for separating the variability of a group of observations into assignable causes and setting up various significance tests. ; Balanced Design: An experimental design where all cells (i.e. treatment combinations) have the same number of observations. ; Blocking: A schedule for conducting treatment combinations in an experimental study such that any effects on the experimental results due to a known change in raw materials, operators, machines, etc., become concentrated in the levels of the blocking variable. The reason for blocking is to isolate a systematic effect and prevent it from obscuring the main effects. Blocking is achieved by restricting randomization. ; Design: A set of experimental runs which allows the fit of a particular model and the estimate of effects. ; Effect: How changing the settings of a factor changes the response. The effect of a single factor is also called a main effect. ; Error: Unexplained variation in a collection of observations. DOE's typically require understanding of both random error and lack of fit error. ; Experimental Unit: The entity to which a specific treatment combination is applied. ; Factors: Process inputs an investigator manipulates to cause a change in the output. ; Fixed Effect: An effect associated with an input variable that has a limited number of levels or in which only a limited number of levels are of interest to the experimenter. ; Lack of Fit Error: Error that occurs when the analysis omits one or more important terms or factors from the process model. Including replication in a DOE allows separation of experimental error into its components: lack of fit and random (pure) error. ; Model: Mathematical relationship which relates changes in a given response to changes in one or more factors. ; Random Effect: An effect associated with input variables chosen at random from a population having a large or infinite number of possible values. ; Random error: Error that occurs due to natural variation in the process. Random error is typically assumed to be normally distributed with zero mean and a constant variance. Random error is also called experimental error. ; Randomization: A schedule for allocating treatment material and for conducting treatment combinations in a DOE such that the conditions in one run neither depend on the conditions of the previous run nor predict the conditions in the subsequent runs. ; Replication: Performing the same treatment combination more than once. Including replication allows an estimate of the random error independent of any lack of fit error. ; Responses: The output(s) of a process. Sometimes called dependent variable(s). ; Treatment: A treatment is a specific combination of factor levels whose effect is to be compared with other treatments. ; Variance Components: Partitioning of the overall variation into assignable components. ==Models== There are three classes of models used in the analysis of variance, and these are outlined here.  models (Model 1)=== The fixed-effects model of analysis of variance applies to situations in which the experimenter applies one or more treatments to the subjects of the experiment to see if the response variable values change. This allows the experimenter to estimate the ranges of response variable values that the treatment would generate in the population as a whole.  models (Model 2)=== Random effects models are used when the treatments are not fixed. This occurs when the various factor levels are sampled from a larger population. Because the levels themselves are random variables, some assumptions and the method of contrasting the treatments differ from the fixed-effects model. Montgomery (2001, Chapter 12: Experiments with random factors)  models (Model 3)=== A mixed-effects model contains experimental factors of both fixed and random-effects types, with appropriately different  and analysis for the two types. Example: Teaching experiments could be performed by a university department to find a good introductory textbook, with each text considered a treatment. The fixed-effects model would compare a list of candidate texts. The random-effects model would determine whether important differences exist among a list of randomly selected texts. The mixed-effects model would compare the (fixed) incumbent texts to randomly selected alternatives. Defining fixed and random effects has proven elusive, with competing definitions arguably leading toward a linguistic quagmire. Gelman (2005 pp 20-21) ==Assumptions of ANOVA== The analysis of variance has been studied from several approaches, the most common of which uses a linear model that relates the response to the treatments and blocks. Even when the statistical model is nonlinear  it can be approximated by a linear model for which an analysis of variance may be appropriate. ===Textbook analysis using a normal  The analysis of variance can be presented in terms of a linear model, which makes the following assumptions about the probability distribution of the responses: Howell 2002 p 323 * Statistical  of observations &ndash; this is an assumption of the model that simplifies the statistical analysis. * normal  &ndash; the distributions of the residuals are Normal  * Equality (or "homogeneity") of variances, called  &mdash; the variance of data in groups should be the same. Model-based approaches usually assume that the variance is constant. The  property also appears in the randomization (design-based) analysis of randomized experiments, where it is a necessary logical  of the randomized design and the assumption of "unit treatment additivity". Hinkelmann and Kempthorne (2008, Volume 1, Chapter 6: The Completely Randomized Design) If the responses of a randomized balanced experiment fail to have constant variance, then <!-- by contraposition  the assumption of "unit treatment additivity" is necessarily violated. To test the hypothesis that all treatments have exactly the same effect, the F-test's p-values closely approximate the permutation test's p-values: The approximation is particularly close when the design is balanced. Hinkelmann and Kempthorne (2008) Such permutation tests characterize uniformly most powerful test|tests with maximum power against all alternative  hypotheses, as observed by Rosenbaum.  Rosenbaum (2002, page 40) cites Section 5.7 (Permutation Tests), Theorem 2.3 (actually Theorem 3, page 184) of Erich Leo  "Testing Statistical Hypotheses" (1959). The ANOVA F–test (of the  that all treatments have exactly the same effect) is recommended as a practical test, because of its robustness against many alternative distributions. Moore and McCabe (2003, page 763)  The F-test for the comparison of variances has a mixed reputation. It is not recommended as a hypothesis test to determine whether two "different" samples have the same variance. It is recommended for ANOVA where two estimates of the variance of the "same" sample are compared. While the F-test is not generally robust against departures from normality, it has been found to be robust in the special case of ANOVA. Citations from Moore & McCabe (2003): "Analysis of variance us
Alkane	 structure of methane, the simplest alkane Alkanes (also known as paraffins or saturated hydrocarbons ) are chemical compounds that consist only of hydrogen and carbon atoms and are bonded exclusively by single bonds (i.e., they are Saturation  compounds) without any cycles (or loops; i.e., Cyclic  structure). Alkanes belong to a homologous series of organic compounds in which the members differ by a constant relative molecular mass of 14. They have 2 main commercial sources,  oil and natural gas. Each carbon atom has 4 bonds (either C-H bond|C-H or C-C bonds), and each hydrogen atom is joined to a carbon atom (H-C bonds). A series of linked carbon atoms is known as the skeletal formula|carbon skeleton or carbon backbone. The number of carbon atoms is used to define the size of the alkane (e.g., C  2  -alkane). An alkyl group, generally abbreviated with the symbol R, is a functional group or side-chain that, like an alkane, consists solely of single-bonded carbon and hydrogen atoms, for example a methyl or ethyl group. The simplest possible alkane (the parent molecule) is methane, CH  4  . There is no limit to the number of carbon atoms that can be linked together, the only limitation being that the molecule is acyclic, is Saturation  and is a hydrocarbon. Saturated oils and waxes are examples of larger alkanes where the number of carbons in the carbon backbone is greater than 10. Alkanes are not very reactive and have little biological activity. Alkanes can be viewed as a molecular tree upon which can be hung the more biologically  portions (functional groups) of the molecule. ==Structure  Saturated hydrocarbons can be: * linear (general formula ) wherein the carbon atoms are joined in a snake-like structure * branched (general formula , "n"  3) wherein the carbon backbone splits off in one or more directions * Cyclic  (general formula , "n"  2) wherein the carbon backbone is linked so as to form a loop. According to the definition by International Union of Pure and Applied  the former two are alkanes, whereas the third group is called cycloalkanes. Saturated hydrocarbons can also combine any of the linear, cyclic (e.g., polycyclic) and branching structures, and they are still alkanes (no general formula) as long as they are Open chain  (i.e., having no loops).They also have single covalent bonds between their carbons. ==Isomerism==  C4 hydrocarbons  Different C  4  -alkanes and -cycloalkanes (left to right):  and isobutane are the two C  4  H  10  isomers; cyclobutane and  are the two C  4  H  8  isomers. <br   is the only C  4  H  6  compound and has no isomer; tetrahedrane (not shown) is the only C  4  H  4  compound and has also no isomer. Alkanes with more than three carbon atoms can be arranged in various different ways, forming structural isomers. The simplest isomer of an alkane is the one in which the carbon atoms are arranged in a single chain with no branches. This isomer is sometimes called the "n"-isomer ("n" for "normal", although it is not necessarily the most common). However the chain of carbon atoms may also be branched at one or more points. The number of possible isomers increases rapidly with the number of carbon atoms . For example: * C  1  : no isomers: methane * C  2  : no isomers: ethane * C  3  : no isomers: propane * C  4  : 2 isomers:  & isobutane * C  5  : 3 isomers: pentane, isopentane, neopentane * C  6  : 5 isomers: hexane,    &  * C  12  : 355 isomers * C  32  : 27,711,253,769 isomers * C  60  :  isomers, many of which are not stable. Branched alkanes can be chirality  For example 3-methylhexane and its higher Homology  are chiral due to their stereogenic center at carbon atom number 3. In addition to these isomers, the chain of carbon atoms may form one or more loops. Such compounds are called cycloalkanes.  The IUPAC nomenclature of organic  nomenclature (systematic way of naming compounds) for alkanes is based on identifying hydrocarbon chains. Unbranched, saturated hydrocarbon chains are named systematically with a Greek numerical prefix denoting the number of carbons and the suffix "-ane". August Wilhelm von Hofmann suggested systematizing nomenclature by using the whole sequence of vowels a, e, i, o and u to create suffixes -ane, -ene, -ine (or -yne), -one, -une, for the hydrocarbons. The first three name hydrocarbons with single, double and triple bonds; "-one" represents a ketone; "-ol" represents an alcohol or OH group; "-oxy-" means an ether and refers to oxygen between two carbons, so that  is the IUPAC name for dimethyl ether. It is difficult or impossible to find compounds with more than one IUPAC name. This is because shorter chains attached to longer chains are prefixes and the convention includes brackets. Numbers in the name, referring to which carbon a group is attached to, should be as low as possible, so that 1- is implied and usually omitted from names of organic compounds with only one side-group. Symmetric compounds will have two ways of arriving at the same name. ===Linear alkanes=== Straight-chain alkanes are sometimes indicated by the prefix "n-" (for "normal") where a non-linear isomer exists. Although this is not strictly necessary, the usage is still common in cases where there is an important difference in properties between the straight-chain and branched-chain isomers, e.g.,  or 2- or  The members of the series (in terms of number of carbon atoms) are named as follows: :methane, CH  4  - one carbon and four hydrogen :ethane, C  2  H  6  - two carbon and six hydrogen :propane, C  3  H  8  - three carbon and 8 hydrogen :butane, C  4  H  10  - four carbon and 10 hydrogen :pentane, C  5  H  12  - five carbon and 12 hydrogen :hexane, C  6  H  14  - six carbon and 14 hydrogen These names were  from methanol, diethyl ether|ether, propionic acid and butyric acid, respectively. Alkanes with five or more carbon atoms are named by adding the Affix|suffix -ane to the appropriate IUPAC numerical  multiplier prefix name =  with elision of any terminal vowel ("-a" or "-o") from the basic numerical term. Hence, pentane, C  5  H  12  ; hexane, C  6  H  14  ; heptane, C  7  H  16  ; octane, C  8  H  18  ; etc. The prefix is generally Greek, with the exceptions of nonane which has a Latin language|Latin prefix, and undecane and tridecane which have mixed-language prefixes. For a more complete list, see List of alkanes. ===Branched alkanes===  model of isopentane (common name) or 2-methylbutane (IUPAC systematic name) Simple branched alkanes often have a common name using a prefix to distinguish them from linear alkanes, for example  isopentane, and neopentane. IUPAC naming conventions can be used to produce a systematic name. The key steps in the naming of more complicated branched alkanes are as follows: * Identify the longest continuous chain of carbon atoms * Name this longest root chain using standard naming rules * Name each side chain by changing the suffix of the name of the alkane from "-ane" to "-yl" * Number the root chain so that sum of the numbers assigned to each side group will be as low as possible * Number and name the side chains before the name of the root chain * If there are multiple side chains of the same type, use prefixes such as "di-" and "tri-" to indicate it as such, and number each one. * Add side chain names in alphabetical (disregarding "di-" etc. prefixes) order in front of the name of the root chain {|   |+ Comparison of nomenclatures for three isomers of C  5  H  12  |- ! Common name ! "n"-pentane || isopentane || neopentane |- ! IUPAC name ! pentane || 2-methylbutane ||  |- ! Structure |  ||  ||  |} ===Cyclic alkanes=== So-called cyclic alkanes are, in the technical sense, "not" alkanes, but cycloalkanes. They are hydrocarbons just like alkanes, but contain one or more rings. Simple cycloalkanes have a prefix "cyclo-" to distinguish them from alkanes. Cycloalkanes are named as per their acyclic counterparts with respect to the number of carbon atoms, e.g., cyclopentane (C  5  H  10  ) is a cycloalkane with 5 carbon atoms just like pentane (C  5  H  12  ), but they are joined up in a five-membered ring. In a similar manner, propane and cyclopropane, butane and cyclobutane, etc. Substituted cycloalkanes are named similar to substituted alkanes — the cycloalkane ring is stated, and the substituents are according to their position on the ring, with the numbering decided by  rules.  ===Trivial names=== The trivial (non-IUPAC  name for alkanes is "paraffins." Together, alkanes are known as the "paraffin series". Trivial names for compounds are usually historical artifacts. They were coined before the development of systematic names, and have been retained due to familiar usage in industry. Cycloalkanes are also called naphthenes. It is almost certain that the term paraffin stems from the petrochemical industry. Branched-chain alkanes are called  The use of the term "paraffin" is a general term and often does not distinguish between pure compounds and mixtures of isomers with the same chemical formula (i.e., like a chemical anagram), e.g., pentane and isopentane. ;Examples The following trivial names are retained in the IUPAC system: * isobutane for  * isopentane for 2-methylbutane * neopentane for  ==Physical properties== ===Table of alkanes=== {|  | Alkane | Formula | Boiling point [°C] | Melting point [°C] | Density [g·cm  3  ] (at 20 °C ) |- |Methane |CH  4  | -162 | -183 | gas |- |Ethane |C  2  H  6  | -89 | -172 | gas |- |Propane |C  3  H  8  | -42 | -188 | gas |- |Butane |C  4  H  10  | 0 | -138 | gas |- |Pentane |C  5  H  12  | 36 | -130 | 0.626(liquid) |- |Hexane |C  6  H  14  | 69 | -95 | 0.659(liquid) |- |Heptane |C  7  H  16  | 98 | -91 | 0.684(liquid) |- |Octane |C  8  H  18  | 126 | -57 | 0.703(liquid) |- |Nonane |C  9  H  20  | 151 | -54 | 0.718(liquid) |- |Decane |C  10  H  22  | 174 | -30 | 0.730(liquid) |- |Undecane |C  11  H  24  | 196 | -26 | 0.740(liquid) |- |Dodecane |C  12  H  26  | 216 | -10 | 0.749(liquid) |- |Icosane |C  20  H  42  | 343 | 37 | solid |- |Triacontane |C  30  H  62  | 450 | 66 | solid |- |Tetracontane |C  40  H  82  | 525 | 82 | solid |- |Pentacontane |C  50  H  102  | 575 | 91 | solid |- |Hexacontane |C  60  H  122  | 625 | 100 | solid |} ===Boiling point===  (blue) and boiling (orange) points of the first 14 "n"-alkanes in °C. Alkanes experience  van der Waals forces. Stronger  van der Waals forces give rise to greater boiling points of alkanes.  There are two determinants for the strength of the van der Waals forces: * the number of electrons surrounding the molecule, which increases with the alkane's molecular weight * the surface area of the molecule Under standard conditions, from CH  4  to C  4  H  10  alkanes are gaseous; from C  5  H  12  to C  17  H  36  they are liquids; and after C  18  H  38  they are solids. As the boiling point of alkanes is primarily determined by weight, it should not be a surprise that the boiling point has almost a linear relationship with the size (molecular weight) of the molecule. As a rule of thumb, the boiling point rises 20–30 °C for each carbon added to the chain; this rule applies to other homologous series. name =  A straight-chain alkane will have a boiling point higher than a branched-chain alkane due to the greater surface area in contact, thus the greater van der Waals forces, between adjacent molecules. For example, compare isobutane  and n-butane (butane), which boil at −12 and 0 °C, and  and  which boil at 50 and 58 °C, respectively. name =  For the latter case, two molecules  can "lock" into each other better than the cross-shaped  hence the greater van der Waals forces. On the other hand, cycloalkanes tend to have higher boiling points than their linear counterparts due to the locked conformations of the molecules, which give a plane of intermolecular contact. ===Melting point=== The melting points of the alkanes follow a similar trend to boiling points for the same reason as outlined above.
